# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/anne_lisbeth
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Anne Lisbeth 

Anne Lisbeth's complexion was like peaches and cream; her eyes were
bright, her teeth shiny white; she was young, gay, and beautiful to look
upon; her steps were light and her mind was even lighter. What would
come of all this? "That awful brat," people said about her baby; and
indeed he wasn't pretty, so he was left with the ditchdigger's wife.

Anne Lisbeth went into service in the Count's castle. There she sat in
a magnificent room, dressed in silk and velvet; not a breath of wind was
allowed to blow on her nor anyone to speak a harsh word to her. She was
nurse to the Count's child, who was as beloved as a prince, beautiful
as an angel. How she loved him!

Her own child was provided for in the ditchdigger's house, where his
wife's temper boiled over more often than her pot. Sometimes the child
was left alone all day long, and cried; but what nobody hears doesn't
bother anyone! He cried himself to sleep, and in sleep there is neither
hunger nor thirst; sleep is such a good invention!

"Ill weeds grow fast," says the proverb, and Anne Lisbeth's boy did
indeed shoot up rapidly. It was as if he had taken root in the
ditchdigger's household; his mother had paid for his upbringing and
considered herself well rid of him. She was a city lady now, was well
provided for, and whenever she went out she was beautifully dressed; but
she never went to see her son at the ditchdigger's; that was too far
from the city, and there was no reason for her to go there, anyway; the
boy was theirs, and now, they decided, it was time for him to earn his
keep; so he found work tending Mads Jensen's red cow.

The watchdog at Blegdam Manor sits proudly on top of its house in the
sunshine, barking at passers-by, but in rainy weather it lies, warm and
dry, inside its kennel. Anne Lisbeth's boy sat at the edge of a ditch
in the sunshine, whittling sticks or watching three blossoming
strawberry plants; he hoped they would soon turn into berries - that was
his happiest thought - but the berries never ripened. Through sunshine
or showers he sat there; he was often soaked to the skin, but the cold
wind soon dried his clothes on his body. Whenever he went to the
farmyard he received only kicks and cuffs and was called "stupid and
ugly"; he was used to that - nobody loved him.

How did Anne Lisbeth's boy get along? How could he under such
circumstances? It was his fate never to be loved.

At last he was literally pushed off the earth and sent to sea in a
wretched little sailing vessel. Here he took the helm while the skipper
drank - a frostbitten, shabby-looking little boy, and always hungry! One
would think he never had enough to eat, and that really was the case.

It was late in the autumn, wet, raw, stormy weather, with a wind that
cut through the warmest clothing, especially out at sea. A miserable
little vessel with one sail drove on before the wind; it had a crew of
two men, or rather a man and a half - the skipper and his boy. All day
the light had been no brighter than twilight; now it grew still darker
and it was bitterly cold. The skipper brought forth a bottle and a glass
and took a swallow to warm himself up; the top of the glass was whole,
but its foot had been broken off, so instead it had a little piece of
wood, painted blue, to stand on. A drink is a great comfort, and two are
even better. The boy was at the helm, holding it with rough, tarred
hands, a wretched, shrinking form with unkempt hair; it was the
ditchdigger's boy, registered in the parish records as the son of Anne
Lisbeth.

The wind drove the ship hard before it; the sail bellied out before the
power of the wind; it was rough and wet everywhere, and it might soon be
even worse. Stop! What was that? What crashed? What sprang up? What
grasped the little vessel? The boat whirled around. Was it a waterspout
or a tidal wave? The boy at the helm screamed, "Lord Jesus, save us!"
The vessel had struck on a great rock, and it sank like a waterlogged
old shoe in a duckpond; sank with "man and mouse," as the saying goes;
there were mice on board, but only a man and a half - the skipper and
the ditchdigger's boy. No one saw it, save the screaming gulls above
and the darting fishes beneath, and these hardly saw it clearly, for
they fled in terror when the water poured into the doomed vessel. There
it lay, scarcely a fathom below the water, and the two were drowned and
forgotten. Only the glass was left, for the blue wooden block kept it
afloat, and it drifted onto the shore. Where and when? That is of no
consequence. That old broken glass had been useful, and had been loved,
too, in a way; which Anne Lisbeth's son had never been. However, in the
kingdom of heaven no soul shall ever have cause to sigh, "Never
loved!"

Anne Lisbeth meanwhile had been living for several years in a large
town; she was addressed as "madam" and always held herself very
proudly when she spoke of olden times, of the times when she rode in a
carriage and talked with countesses and baronesses. And she talked of
her foster child, that sweetest of little angels, and how he had loved
her and she had loved him, how they had kissed and caressed each other,
for he was her pride and joy. Now he was tall, fourteen years old, a
bright, beautiful boy. She hadn't seen him since the time she carried
him in her arms; for many years she had not been at the Count's castle,
which was a long journey away.

"But I must find a way to get there someday," said Anne Lisbeth. "I
must see my sweet young count again. He must be missing me, and loving
me as he did when his angelic little arms clung around my neck and he
said, 'Ann-Lis,' as sweet as a violin. Ah, yes, I must make short work
of it and see him again!"

So she made the long trip, partly on foot and partly by wagon. The
castle was as magnificent and the gardens as lovely as ever, but the
servants were all new to her, and not one of them knew Anne Lisbeth or
what she had once meant there. But the Countess would tell them, she
thought, and her own boy; how she longed for him!

Now Anne Lisbeth was finally here, but they kept her waiting a long
time. At last, just before the household went to dinner, she was called
in. The Countess spoke to her very courteously and promised that after
dinner she should see her beloved boy. So she had to wait for another
summons.

How tall, thin, and lanky he had grown, but he still had his beautiful
eyes and angelic mouth; and he looked straight at her without a word.
Certainly he had no recollection of her. He turned to go, but she caught
his hand and pressed it to her lips. "All right," he said, "that's
enough," and then he left the room.

The ungrateful young nobleman, whom she had loved above all on earth and
had made the pride of her life!

So Anne Lisbeth left the castle and made her way homeward along the
highway. She was very sorrowful; he had been so cold and strange to her,
without a word or thought for her, he whom she had once carried in her
arms night and day and always had carried in her heart.

Then a huge black raven flew down and alighted on the road just in front
of her and croaked again and again. "Oh, what bird of ill omen are
you?" she said.

As she passed the ditchdigger's house, his wife was standing in the
doorway, and they spoke to one another.

"How robust you look!" said the ditchdigger's wife. "You are plump
and stout! Everything must be going well with you."

"Pretty well," replied Anne Lisbeth.

"The boat went down with them," said the ditchdigger's wife.
"Skipper Lars and your boy were both drowned. So that ends that. But I
hoped that the boy would have lived to help me out from time to time
with a little money; he hasn't cost you anything for a long while, you
know, Anne Lisbeth."

"Drowned, are they?" repeated Anne Lisbeth, and then said nothing more
on that subject.

Anne Lisbeth was heartsick because the young count wouldn't speak to
her, she who loved him so and had taken that long trip to see him; the
journey had also been expensive. The pleasure it had brought her was
little indeed. But she didn't say a word about it; she wouldn't
lighten her mind by talking about it to the ditchdigger's wife, who
might think she was no longer welcome at the Count's castle. While they
were talking, the raven again flew screaming over her head. "That ugly
black thing!" said Anne Lisbeth. "That's the second time it's
frightened me today!"

She had brought some coffee beans and chicory with her; it would be a
kindness to the ditchdigger's wife to give these to her and share a cup
with her. While the old woman went to make the coffee Anne Lisbeth sat
down and soon fell asleep.

Strangely enough, she dreamed of one whom she had never seen in her
dreams before - her own child, who in that very house had hungered and
wept, who had been kicked about in heat and cold, and who now lay deep
below the sea, the good Lord only knew where. She dreamed that even as
she sat there waiting for the coffee and smelling the fragrance drifting
in to her from the kitchen, a shining little angel, beautiful as the
young count, stood in the doorway and spoke to her.

"The end of the world is come," said the little angel. "Hold fast to
me, for you are still my mother! You have an angel in paradise. Hold
fast to me!" Then he took hold of her, and at that very moment there
came a tremendous crash, as though the whole world were bursting into
pieces, and as the angel rose in the air, holding her tightly by her
sleeves, she felt herself lifted from the ground. But then something
heavy clung to her feet and dragged her down; it was as if a hundred
other women were holding tightly to her, screaming, "If you are to be
saved, we must be saved, too! Hold fast! Hold fast!" And then they all
clung to her. The weight was too heavy; ritsch, ratsch! - her sleeves
were split, and she fell down in terror - and awoke.

Her head was so dizzy she nearly fell off the chair where she was
sitting. She could not understand her dream clearly, but she felt it
foretold evil for her.

They had their coffee and talked for a while. Then Anne Lisbeth walked
on to the nearest village, where she was to meet the carrier and drive
home with him that evening. But when she got there, the carrier told her
he couldn't start until the following evening. She thought it over -
what it would cost her to stay there, the length of the distance home,
and realized that if she went along the seashore instead of by road, it
would be nearly two miles shorter; it was clear weather and the moon was
at the full. And so Anne Lisbeth decided to go at once; she could be
home the next day.

The sun had set, the vesper bells were still ringing - no, it was not
the bells, but Peter Oxe's frogs croaking in their pond. Soon they,
too, were silent, and then all was still; no bird raised its voice, for
all were at rest; and it seemed the owl was not at home. The hush of
death settled over forest and shore. She could hear her own footsteps in
the sand. No wave disturbed the sea, the deep waters were at peace;
everywhere was silence, silence among the living and the dead.

Anne Lisbeth walked on, not thinking of anything in particular, as we
say. Yet, though she was not conscious of it, her thoughts were busy
within her, as they always are within all of us. They lie asleep inside
us, thoughts that have already shaped themselves into action and
thoughts that have never yet stirred - there they lie still, and someday
they will come forth. It is written: "The labor of righteousness is
peace"; and again it is written: "The wages of sin are death!" Much
has been said and written that one does not know - or, as it was with
Anne Lisbeth, does not remember - but such things can appear before
one's subconscious self, can come to mind, though one is unaware of it.

The germs of vices and virtues are alive deep in our hearts - in yours
and mine; they lurk like tiny invisible seeds. There comes a ray of
sunshine or the touch of an evil hand; you turn to the right or to the
left, and the little seed quivers into life, puts forth shoots, and
pours its life throughout all the veins. Walking in a daydream, one may
be unconscious of many painful thoughts, but they have their being
within us all the same; thus Anne Lisbeth walked as if in a daydream,
but her thoughts lived within her.

From Candlemas to Candlemas the heart has much written upon it, even the
record of the whole year. Many sins are forgotten, sins in word or
thought, sins against God or our neighbor or our own conscience; we
think not of them, nor did Anne Lisbeth. She had broken no laws of the
land; she knew that she was popular, esteemed, even respected.

Now, as she walked along the shore, suddenly something made her start
and stand still! What was it? Only an old man's hat. Where could that
have been washed overboard? She drew closer and looked down at it.

Oh! What was that lying over there? She became very frightened, and yet
it was nothing but a heap of tangled seaweed, but to her fancy it had
seemed for a moment the body of a man. As she continued on her way she
remembered many stories she had heard as a child about the old
superstitious belief in the "sea ghost" - the ghost of a drowned body
that lay still unburied, washed by the tides on the wild seashore. The
lifeless body itself could harm no one, but the "sea ghost" would
follow a solitary wanderer, clinging fast to him and demanding to be
carried to the churchyard and buried in consecrated ground. "Hold on!
Hold on!" it would cry; and as Anne Lisbeth thought of these words, all
at once there came back to her most vividly her dream - how the mothers
had clung to her, screaming, "Hold fast! Hold on!" how the world had
split beneath her, how her sleeves had been torn apart and she had
fallen from the grasp of her child, who had tried to hold her up in the
hour of doom. Her child, her own flesh and blood, whom she had never
loved and scarcely ever thought of, was now lying at the bottom of the
sea; any day his body might be washed ashore, and his ghost might follow
her, wailing, "Hold on! Hold on! Bury me in Christian earth!"

Panic-stricken by this horrible thought, she ran faster and faster.
Terror touched her heart with a cold, clammy finger; she was ready to
faint. And as she looked upon the sea, the air grew thicker and thicker,
a heavy mist fell over the scene, veiling tree and bush in strange
disguises. She turned to seek for the moon behind her - and it was only
a pale disk without rays. Then something heavy seemed to drag at her
limbs; "Hold on! Hold on!" she thought. And when she again turned
toward the moon its white face seemed close beside her, and the mist
hung like a shroud over her shoulders. "Hold on! Bury me in Christian
earth!" - she could almost hear those words. And then she did hear a
sound, so hollow, so hoarse - not the voices of the frogs in the pond
nor the tones of the raven, for neither was near by, but clearly she
heard the dreadful words, "Bury me! Bury me!" Yes! It was, it must be,
the ghost of her own child, who could find no rest for his soul until
his body was carried to the churchyard and laid in a Christian grave.

To the churchyard she would hurry; that very hour she would dig the
grave; and as she turned toward the church her burden seemed to grow
lighter, until it disappeared altogether. As soon as she felt that, she
started back to follow the short cut to her home, but once more her
limbs sank beneath her, and again the terrible words rang in her ears,
"Hold on!

Hold on!" It sounded like the croaking of a frog and like a wailing
bird.

"Bury me! Bury me!"

Cold and clammy was the mist, but still colder and clammier were her
hands and face under the touch of fear! A heavy weight again clung to
her and seemed to drag her down; her heart quaked with thoughts and
feelings that had never stirred within her before this moment.

In our Northern countries a single spring night is often enough to dress
the beech wood, and in the morning sunlight it appears in its young,
bright foliage.

In one second the seed of sin within us may be lifted to the light and
unfolded into thoughts, words, and deeds; and thus it is when conscience
is awakened. And our Lord awakens it when we lest expect it; when there
is no way to excuse ourselves, the deed stands open to view, bearing
witness against us; thoughts spring into words, and words ring clearly
throughout the world. Then we are horrified to find what we have carried
within us, that we have not overcome the evil we have sown in
thoughtlessness and pride. The heart hides within itself all vices and
virtues, and they grow even in the shallowest ground.

Anne Lisbeth, overwhelmed with the realization of her sin, sank to the
ground and crept along for some distance. "Bury me! "Bury me!" still
rang in her ears, and gladly would she have buried herself, if the grave
could have brought eternal forgetfulness. It was her hour of awakening,
and she was full of anguish and horror; superstition made her blood run
hot and cold. Many things of which she had feared to speak came into her
mind. There passed before her, silently as a shadowy cloud in the clear
moonlight, a vision she had heard of before. It was a glowing chariot of
fire, drawn by four snorting horses, with fire blazing from their eyes
and nostrils; and nostrils; and inside sat a wicked nobleman who more
than a century ago had ruled here. Every midnight, he rode into his
courtyard and right out again. He was not pale, like other ghosts; no,
his face was as black as burnt coal. As he passed Anne Lisbeth he nodded
and beckoned to her, "Hold on! Hold on! You may ride in a count's
carriage once more and forget your child."

She pulled herself together and hastened to the churchyard, but the
black crosses and the black ravens mingled before her eyes; the ravens
screamed as they had done that morning, but now she could understand
what they were saying. "I am Mother Raven! I am Mother Raven!" said
each of them, and Anne Lisbeth knew the name fitted herself well; maybe
she would be changed into a huge black bird like these, and have to cry
as they cried, if she did not dig the grave.

Then she flung herself on the ground and began frantically digging with
her hands in the hard earth; she dug till the blood ran from her
fingers.

"Bury me! Bury me!" Still she heard those words, and every moment she
dreaded to hear the cock crow and see the first streak of dawn in the
east. For if her task were not completed before daylight she knew she
would be lost.

And the cock did crow, and the light appeared in the east - and the
grave was only half dug, and behold! an icy hand slid over her head and
face, down to her heart. A voice seemed to sigh, "Only half the
grave!" and a shadowy form drifted past her and down to the bottom of
the ocean. Yes, it was indeed the "sea ghost," and Anne Lisbeth fell
fainting to the earth, exhausted and overpowered, and her senses left
her.

When she came to, it was bright daylight, and two men were lifting her
up. She was lying, not in the churchyard, but down on the seashore,
where she had been digging a deep hole in the sand, and had cut her
fingers on a broken glass, the stem of which was stuck in a wooden block
painted blue.

Anne Lisbeth was ill; her conscience had spoken loudly to her that
night, and superstitious terror had mingled its voice with the voice of
conscience. She had no power to distinguish between them; she was now
convinced that she had but half a soul, while the other half had been
borne away by her child, away to the bottom of the ocean; and never
could she hope for the mercy of God until she again possessed the half
soul that was imprisoned in those deep waters.

Anne Lisbeth went home, but she was no longer the same. Her thoughts
were like tangled yarn; there was only one thread that she could clearly
grasp; just one idea possessed her, that she must carry the "sea
ghost" to the churchyard and there dig a grave for it. Many a night
they missed her from her home and always found her down by the shore,
waiting for the "sea ghost." So a whole year passed, and then one
night she disappeared and this time was sought in vain. All of the
following day was spent in searching for her.

Toward evening, when the parish clerk entered the church to ring the
bell for vespers, he found Anne Lisbeth lying before the altar. She had
been here ever since dawn; her strength was nearly gone, but her eyes
were bright and a faint rosy hue lighted her face; the last sunbeams
shone down upon her, streamed over the altar, and glowed on the bright
silver clasps of the Bible, open at this text from the Prophet Joel;
"Rend your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your
God." This was just by chance, said people, as so many things happen by
chance.

In Anne Lisbeth's face, as the setting sun shone upon it, were peace
and grace. Now she was so happy, she said. Now she had won back her
soul! During the past night the spirit of her own child had been with
her, and had said, "You dug but half a grave for me, but now for a year
and a day you have entombed me in your own heart, and that is the only
proper resting place a mother can provide for her child!" And then he
had returned to her lost half soul and guided her to the church!

"Now I am in God's house!" she said. "And only there can one be
happy!"

When the sun had set, the soul of Anne Lisbeth had gone way up from this
earth to where there are no fears nor the troubles that we have here,
even such as those of Anne Lisbeth.
