# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_story_of_the_year
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The story of the year 

It was near the end of January, and a terrible fall of snow was pelting
down, and whirling through the streets and lanes; the windows were
plastered with snow on the outside, snow fell in masses from the roofs.
Every one seemed in a great hurry; they ran, they flew, fell into each
other's arms, holding fast for a moment as long as they could stand
safely. Coaches and horses looked as if they had been frosted with
sugar. The footmen stood with their backs against the carriages, so as
to turn their faces from the wind. The foot passengers kept within the
shelter of the carriages, which could only move slowly on in the deep
snow. At last the storm abated, and a narrow path was swept clean in
front of the houses; when two persons met in this path they stood still,
for neither liked to take the first step on one side into the deep snow
to let the other pass him. There they stood silent and motionless, till
at last, as if by tacit consent, they each sacrificed a leg and buried
it in the deep snow.

Towards evening, the weather became calm. The sky, cleared from the
snow, looked more lofty and transparent, while the stars shone with new
brightness and purity. The frozen snow crackled under foot, and was
quite firm enough to bear the sparrows, who hopped upon it in the
morning dawn. They searched for food in the path which had been swept,
but there was very little for them, and they were terribly cold.

"Tweet, tweet," said one to another; "they call this a new year, but
I think it is worse than the last. We might just as well have kept the
old year; I'm quite unhappy, and I have a right to be so."

"Yes, you have; and yet the people ran about and fired off guns, to
usher in the new year," said a little shivering sparrow. "They threw
things against the doors, and were quite beside themselves with joy,
because the old year had disappeared. I was glad too, for I expected we
should have some warm days, but my hopes have come to nothing. It
freezes harder than ever; I think mankind have made a mistake in
reckoning time."

"That they have," said a third, an old sparrow with a white poll;
"they have something they call a calendar; it's an invention of their
own, and everything must be arranged according to it, but it won't do.
When spring comes, then the year begins. It is the voice of nature, and
I reckon by that."

"But when will spring come?" asked the others.

"It will come when the stork returns, but he is very uncertain, and
here in the town no one knows anything about it. In the country they
have more knowledge; shall we fly away there and wait? we shall be
nearer to spring then, certainly."

"That may be all very well," said another sparrow, who had been
hopping about for a long time, chirping, but not saying anything of
consequence, "but I have found a few comforts here in town which, I'm
afraid, I should miss out in the country. Here in this neighborhood,
there lives a family of people who have been so sensible as to place
three or four flower-pots against the wall in the court-yard, so that
the openings are all turned inward, and the bottom of each points
outward. In the latter a hole has been cut large enough for me to fly in
and out. I and my husband have built a nest in one of these pots, and
all our young ones, who have now flown away, were brought up there. The
people who live there of course made the whole arrangement that they
might have the pleasure of seeing us, or they would not have done it. It
pleased them also to strew bread-crumbs for us, and so we have food, and
may consider ourselves provided for. So I think my husband and I will
stay where we are; although we are not very happy, but we shall stay."

"And we will fly into the country," said the others, "to see if
spring is coming." And away they flew.

In the country it was really winter, a few degrees colder than in the
town. The sharp winds blew over the snow-covered fields. The farmer,
wrapped in warm clothing, sat in his sleigh, and beat his arms across
his chest to keep off the cold. The whip lay on his lap. The horses ran
till they smoked. The snow crackled, the sparrows hopped about in the
wheel-ruts, and shivered, crying, "Tweet, tweet; when will spring come?
It is very long in coming."

"Very long indeed," sounded over the field, from the nearest
snow-covered hill. It might have been the echo which people heard, or
perhaps the words of that wonderful old man, who sat high on a heap of
snow, regardless of wind or weather. He was all in white; he had on a
peasant's coarse white coat of frieze. He had long white hair, a pale
face, and large clear blue eyes.

"Who is that old man?" asked the sparrows.

"I know who he is," said an old raven, who sat on the fence, and was
condescending enough to acknowledge that we are all equal in the sight
of Heaven, even as little birds, and therefore he talked with the
sparrows, and gave them the information they wanted. "I know who the
old man is," he said. "It is Winter, the old man of last year; he is
not dead yet, as the calendar says, but acts as guardian to little
Prince Spring who is coming. Winter rules here still. Ugh! the cold
makes you shiver, little ones, does it not?"

"There! Did I not tell you so?" said the smallest of the sparrows.
"The calendar is only an invention of man, and is not arranged
according to nature. They should leave these things to us; we are
created so much more clever than they are."

One week passed, and then another. The forest looked dark, the
hard-frozen lake lay like a sheet of lead. The mountains had
disappeared, for over the land hung damp, icy mists. Large black crows
flew about in silence; it was as if nature slept. At length a sunbeam
glided over the lake, and it shone like burnished silver. But the snow
on the fields and the hills did not glitter as before. The white form of
Winter sat there still, with his un-wandering gaze fixed on the south.
He did not perceive that the snowy carpet seemed to sink as it were into
the earth; that here and there a little green patch of grass appeared,
and that these patches were covered with sparrows.

"Tee-wit, tee-wit; is spring coming at last?"

Spring! How the cry resounded over field and meadow, and through the
dark-brown woods, where the fresh green moss still gleamed on the trunks
of the trees, and from the south came the two first storks flying
through the air, and on the back of each sat a lovely little child, a
boy and a girl. They greeted the earth with a kiss, and wherever they
placed their feet white flowers sprung up from beneath the snow. Hand in
hand they approached the old ice-man, Winter, embraced him and clung to
his breast; and as they did so, in a moment all three were enveloped in
a thick, damp mist, dark and heavy, that closed over them like a veil.
The wind arose with mighty rustling tone, and cleared away the mist.
Then the sun shone out warmly. Winter had vanished away, and the
beautiful children of Spring sat on the throne of the year.

"This is really a new year," cried all the sparrows, "now we shall
get our rights, and have some return for what we suffered in winter."

Wherever the two children wandered, green buds burst forth on bush and
tree, the grass grew higher, and the corn-fields became lovely in
delicate green. The little maiden strewed flowers in her path. She held
her apron before her: it was full of flowers; it was as if they sprung
into life there, for the more she scattered around her, the more flowers
did her apron contain. Eagerly she showered snowy blossoms over apple
and peach-trees, so that they stood in full beauty before even their
green leaves had burst from the bud.

Then the boy and the girl clapped their hands, and troops of birds came
flying by, no one knew from whence, and they all twittered and chirped,
singing "Spring has come!" How beautiful everything was!

Many an old dame came forth from her door into the sunshine, and
shuffled about with great delight, glancing at the golden flowers which
glittered everywhere in the fields, as they used to do in her young
days. The world grew young again to her, as she said, "It is a blessed
time out here to-day."

The forest already wore its dress of dark-green buds. The thyme
blossomed in fresh fragrance. Primroses and anemones sprung forth, and
violets bloomed in the shade, while every blade of grass was full of
strength and sap. Who could resist sitting down on such a beautiful
carpet? and then the young children of Spring seated themselves, holding
each other's hands, and sang, and laughed, and grew.

A gentle rain fell upon them from the sky, but they did not notice it,
for the rain-drops were their own tears of joy. They kissed each other,
and were betrothed; and in the same moment the buds of the trees
unfolded, and when the sun rose, the forest was green.

Hand in hand the two wandered beneath the fresh pendant canopy of
foliage, while the sun's rays gleamed through the opening of the shade,
in changing and varied colors. The delicate young leaves filled the air
with refreshing odor. Merrily rippled the clear brooks and rivulets
between the green, velvety rushes, and over the many-colored pebbles
beneath. All nature spoke of abundance and plenty. The cuckoo sang, and
the lark carolled, for it was now beautiful spring. The careful willows
had, however, covered their blossoms with woolly gloves; and this
carefulness is rather tedious.

Days and weeks went by, and the heat increased. Warm air waved the corn
as it grew golden in the sun. The white northern lily spread its large
green leaves over the glossy mirror of the woodland lake, and the fishes
sought the shadows beneath them. In a sheltered part of the wood, the
sun shone upon the walls of a farm-house, brightening the blooming
roses, and ripening the black juicy berries, which hung on the loaded
cherry-trees, with his hot beams. Here sat the lovely wife of Summer,
the same whom we have seen as a child and a bride; her eyes were fixed
on dark gathering clouds, which in wavy outlines of black and indigo
were piling themselves up like mountains, higher and higher. They came
from every side, always increasing like a rising, rolling sea. Then they
swooped towards the forest, where every sound had been silenced as if by
magic, every breath hushed, every bird mute. All nature stood still in
grave suspense. But in the lanes and the highways, passengers on foot or
in carriages were hurrying to find a place of shelter. Then came a flash
of light, as if the sun had rushed forth from the sky, flaming, burning,
all-devouring, and darkness returned amid a rolling crash of thunder.
The rain poured down in streams,-- now there was darkness, then blinding
light,-- now thrilling silence, then deafening din. The young brown
reeds on the moor waved to and fro in feathery billows; the forest
boughs were hidden in a watery mist, and still light and darkness
followed each other, still came the silence after the roar, while the
corn and the blades of grass lay beaten down and swamped, so that it
seemed impossible they could ever raise themselves again. But after a
while the rain began to fall gently, the sun's rays pierced the clouds,
and the water-drops glittered like pearls on leaf and stem. The birds
sang, the fishes leaped up to the surface of the water, the gnats danced
in the sunshine, and yonder, on a rock by the heaving salt sea, sat
Summer himself, a strong man with sturdy limbs and long, dripping hair.
Strengthened by the cool bath, he sat in the warm sunshine, while all
around him renewed nature bloomed strong, luxuriant, and beautiful: it
was summer, warm, lovely summer.

Sweet and pleasant was the fragrance wafted from the clover-field, where
the bees swarmed round the ruined tower, the bramble twined itself over
the old altar, which, washed by the rain, glittered in the sunshine; and
thither flew the queen bee with her swarm, and prepared wax and honey.
But Summer and his bosom-wife saw it with different eyes, to them the
altar-table was covered with the offerings of nature.

The evening sky shone like gold, no church dome could ever gleam so
brightly, and between the golden evening and the blushing morning there
was moonlight. It was indeed summer.

And days and weeks passed, the bright scythes of the reapers glittered
in the corn-fields, the branches of the apple-trees bent low, heavy with
the red and golden fruit. The hop, hanging in clusters, filled the air
with sweet fragrance, and beneath the hazel-bushes, where the nuts hung
in great bunches, rested a man and a woman-- Summer and his grave
consort.

"See," she exclaimed, "what wealth, what blessings surround us.
Everything is home-like and good, and yet, I know not why, I long for
rest and peace; I can scarcely express what I feel. They are already
ploughing the fields again; more and more the people wish for gain. See,
the storks are flocking together, and following the plough at a short
distance. They are the birds from Egypt, who carried us through the air.
Do you remember how we came as children to this land of the north; we
brought with us flowers and bright sunshine, and green to the forests,
but the wind has been rough with them, and they are now become dark and
brown, like the trees of the south, but they do not, like them, bear
golden fruit."

"Do you wish to see golden fruit?" said the man, "then rejoice," and
he lifted his arm. The leaves of the forest put on colors of red and
gold, and bright tints covered the woodlands. The rose-bushes gleamed
with scarlet hips, and the branches of the elder-trees hung down with
the weight of the full, dark berries. The wild chestnuts fell ripe from
their dark, green shells, and in the forests the violets bloomed for the
second time.

But the queen of the year became more and more silent and pale. "It
blows cold," she said, "and night brings the damp mist; I long for the
land of my childhood."

Then she saw the storks fly away every one, and she stretched out her
hands towards them. She looked at the empty nests; in one of them grew a
long-stalked corn flower, in another the yellow mustard seed, as if the
nest had been placed there only for its comfort and protection, and the
sparrows were flying round them all.

"Tweet, where has the master of the nest gone?" cried one, "I suppose
he could not bear it when the wind blew, and therefore he has left this
country. I wish him a pleasant journey."

The forest leaves became more and more yellow, leaf after leaf fell, and
the stormy winds of Autumn howled. The year was now far advanced, and
upon the fallen, yellow leaves, lay the queen of the year, looking up
with mild eyes at a gleaming star, and her husband stood by her. A gust
of wind swept through the foliage, and the leaves fell in a shower. The
summer queen was gone, but a butterfly, the last of the year, flew
through the cold air.

Damp fogs came, icy winds blew, and the long, dark nights of winter
approached. The ruler of the year appeared with hair white as snow, but
he knew it not; he thought snow-flakes falling from the sky covered his
head, as they decked the green fields with a thin, white covering of
snow.

And then the church bells rang out for Christmas time.

"The bells are ringing for the new-born year," said the ruler, "soon
will a new ruler and his bride be born, and. I shall go to rest with my
wife in yonder light-giving star."

In the fresh, green fir-wood, where the snow lay all around, stood the
angel of Christmas, and consecrated the young trees that were to adorn
his feast.

"May there be joy in the rooms, and under the green boughs," said the
old ruler of the year. In a few weeks he had become a very old man, with
hair as white as snow. "My resting-time draws near; the young pair of
the year will soon claim my crown and sceptre."

"But the night is still thine," said the angel of Christmas, "for
power, but not for rest. Let the snow lie warmly upon the tender seed.
Learn to endure the thought that another is worshipped whilst thou art
still lord. Learn to endure being forgotten while yet thou livest. The
hour of thy freedom will come when Spring appears."

"And when will Spring come?" asked Winter.

"It will come when the stork returns."

And with white locks and snowy beard, cold, bent, and hoary, but strong
as the wintry storm, and firm as the ice, old Winter sat on the
snowdrift-covered hill, looking towards the south, where Winter had sat
before, and gazed. The ice glittered, the snow crackled, the skaters
skimmed over the polished surface of the lakes; ravens and crows formed
a pleasing contrast to the white ground, and not a breath of wind
stirred, and in the still air old Winter clenched his fists, and the ice
lay fathoms deep between the lands.

Then came the sparrows again out of the town, and asked, "Who is that
old man?" The raven sat there still, or it might be his son, which is
the same thing, and he said to them,-- "It is Winter, the old man of
the former year; he is not dead, as the calendar says, but he is
guardian to the spring, which is coming."

"When will Spring come?" asked the sparrows, "for we shall have
better times then, and a better rule. The old times are worth nothing."

And in quiet thought old Winter looked at the leafless forest, where the
graceful form and bends of each tree and branch could be seen; and while
Winter slept, icy mists came from the clouds, and the ruler dreamt of
his youthful days and of his manhood, and in the morning dawn the whole
forest glittered with hoar frost, which the sun shook from the
branches,-- and this was the summer dream of Winter.

"When will Spring come?" asked the sparrows.

"Spring!" Again the echo sounded from the hills on which the snow lay.
The sunshine became warmer, the snow melted, and the birds twittered,
"Spring is coming!"

And high in the air flew the first stork, and the second followed; a
lovely child sat on the back of each, and they sank down on the open
field, kissed the earth, and kissed the quiet old man; and, as the mist
from the mountain top, he vanished away and disappeared.

And the story of the year was finished.

"This is all very fine, no doubt," said the sparrows, "and it is very
beautiful; but it is not according to the calendar, therefore, it must
be all wrong."
