# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_wild_swans
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The wild swans 

Far away in the land to which the swallows fly when it is winter, dwelt
a king who had eleven sons, and on daughter, named Eliza. The eleven
brothers were princes, and each went to school with a star on his
breast, and a sword by his side. They wrote with diamond pencils on gold
slates, and learnt their lessons so quickly and read so easily that
every one might know they were princes. Their sister Eliza sat on a
little stool of plate-glass, and had a book full of pictures, which had
cost as much as half a kingdom.

Oh, these children were indeed happy, but it was not to remain so
always.

Their father, who was king of the country, married a very wicked queen,
who did not love the poor children at all. They knew this from the very
first day after the wedding. In the palace there were great festivities,
and the children played at receiving company; but instead of having, as
usual, all the cakes and apples that were left, she gave them some sand
in a tea-cup, and told them to pretend it was cake.

The week after, she sent little Eliza into the country to a peasant and
his wife, and then she told the king so many untrue things about the
young princes, that he gave himself no more trouble respecting them.

"Go out into the world and get your own living," said the queen. "Fly
like great birds, who have no voice." But she could not make them ugly
as she wished, for they were turned into eleven beautiful wild swans.
Then, with a strange cry, they flew through the windows of the palace,
over the park, to the forest beyond.

It was early morning when they passed the peasant's cottage, where
their sister Eliza lay asleep in her room. They hovered over the roof,
twisted their long necks and flapped their wings, but no one heard them
or saw them, so they were at last obliged to fly away, high up in the
clouds; and over the wide world they flew till they came to a thick,
dark wood, which stretched far away to the seashore.

Poor little Eliza was alone in her room playing with a green leaf, for
she had no other playthings, and she pierced a hole through the leaf,
and looked through it at the sun, and it was as if she saw her
brothers' clear eyes, and when the warm sun shone on her cheeks, she
thought of all the kisses they had given her.

One day passed just like another; sometimes the winds rustled through
the leaves of the rose-bush, and would whisper to the roses, "Who can
be more beautiful than you!" But the roses would shake their heads, and
say, "Eliza is." And when the old woman sat at the cottage door on
Sunday, and read her hymn-book, the wind would flutter the leaves, and
say to the book, "Who can be more pious than you?" and then the
hymn-book would answer "Eliza." And the roses and the hymn-book told
the real truth.

At fifteen she returned home, but when the queen saw how beautiful she
was, she became full of spite and hatred towards her. Willingly would
she have turned her into a swan, like her brothers, but she did not dare
to do so yet, because the king wished to see his daughter.

Early one morning the queen went into the bath-room; it was built of
marble, and had soft cushions, trimmed with the most beautiful tapestry.
She took three toads with her, and kissed them, and said to one, "When
Eliza comes to the bath, seat yourself upon her head, that she may
become as stupid as you are." Then she said to another, "Place
yourself on her forehead, that she may become as ugly as you are, and
that her father may not know her." - "Rest on her heart," she
whispered to the third, "then she will have evil inclinations, and
suffer in consequence." So she put the toads into the clear water, and
they turned green immediately. She next called Eliza, and helped her to
undress and get into the bath. As Eliza dipped her head under the water,
one of the toads sat on her hair, a second on her forehead, and a third
on her breast, but she did not seem to notice them, and when she rose
out of the water, there were three red poppies floating upon it. Had not
the creatures been venomous or been kissed by the witch, they would have
been changed into red roses. At all events they became flowers, because
they had rested on Eliza's head, and on her heart. She was too good and
too innocent for witchcraft to have any power over her.

When the wicked queen saw this, she rubbed her face with walnut-juice,
so that she was quite brown; then she tangled her beautiful hair and
smeared it with disgusting ointment, till it was quite impossible to
recognize the beautiful Eliza.

When her father saw her, he was much shocked, and declared she was not
his daughter. No one but the watch-dog and the swallows knew her; and
they were only poor animals, and could say nothing.

Then poor Eliza wept, and thought of her eleven brothers, who were all
away. Sorrowfully, she stole away from the palace, and walked, the whole
day, over fields and moors, till she came to the great forest. She knew
not in what direction to go; but she was so unhappy, and longed so for
her brothers, who had been, like herself, driven out into the world,
that she was determined to seek them.

She had been but a short time in the wood when night came on, and she
quite lost the path; so she laid herself down on the soft moss, offered
up her evening prayer, and leaned her head against the stump of a tree.
All nature was still, and the soft, mild air fanned her forehead. The
light of hundreds of glow-worms shone amidst the grass and the moss,
like green fire; and if she touched a twig with her hand, ever so
lightly, the brilliant insects fell down around her, like
shooting-stars.

All night long she dreamt of her brothers. She and they were children
again, playing together. She saw them writing with their diamond pencils
on golden slates, while she looked at the beautiful picture-book which
had cost half a kingdom. They were not writing lines and letters, as
they used to do; but descriptions of the noble deeds they had performed,
and of all they had discovered and seen. In the picture-book, too,
everything was living. The birds sang, and the people came out of the
book, and spoke to Eliza and her brothers; but, as the leaves turned
over, they darted back again to their places, that all might be in
order.

When she awoke, the sun was high in the heavens; yet she could not see
him, for the lofty trees spread their branches thickly over her head;
but his beams were glancing through the leaves here and there, like a
golden mist. There was a sweet fragrance from the fresh green verdure,
and the birds almost perched upon her shoulders. She heard water
rippling from a number of springs, all flowing in a lake with golden
sands. Bushes grew thickly round the lake, and at one spot an opening
had been made by a deer, through which Eliza went down to the water. The
lake was so clear that, had not the wind rustled the branches of the
trees and the bushes, so that they moved, they would have appeared as if
painted in the depths of the lake; for every leaf was reflected in the
water, whether it stood in the shade or the sunshine.

As soon as Eliza saw her own face, she was quite terrified at finding it
so brown and ugly; but when she wetted her little hand, and rubbed her
eyes and forehead, the white skin gleamed forth once more; and, after
she had undressed, and dipped herself in the fresh water, a more
beautiful king's daughter could not be found in the wide world.

As soon as she had dressed herself again, and braided her long hair, she
went to the bubbling spring, and drank some water out of the hollow of
her hand. Then she wandered far into the forest, not knowing whither she
went. She thought of her brothers, and felt sure that God would not
forsake her. It is God who makes the wild apples grow in the wood, to
satisfy the hungry, and He now led her to one of these trees, which was
so loaded with fruit, that the boughs bent beneath the weight. Here she
held her noonday repast, placed props under the boughs, and then went
into the gloomiest depths of the forest. It was so still that she could
hear the sound of her own footsteps, as well as the rustling of every
withered leaf which she crushed under her feet. Not a bird was to be
seen, not a sunbeam could penetrate through the large, dark boughs of
the trees. Their lofty trunks stood so close together, that, when she
looked before her, it seemed as if she were enclosed within
trellis-work. Such solitude she had never known before.

The night was very dark. Not a single glow-worm glittered in the moss.
Sorrowfully she laid herself down to sleep; and, after a while, it
seemed to her as if the branches of the trees parted over her head, and
that the mild eyes of angels looked down upon her from heaven.

When she awoke in the morning, she knew not whether she had dreamt this,
or if it had really been so.

Then she continued her wandering; but she had not gone many steps
forward, when she met an old woman with berries in her basket, and she
gave her a few to eat. Then Eliza asked her if she had not seen eleven
princes riding through the forest.

"No," replied the old woman, "But I saw yesterday eleven swans, with
gold crowns on their heads, swimming on the river close by.

" Then she led Eliza a little distance farther to a sloping bank, and
at the foot of it wound a little river. The trees on its banks stretched
their long leafy branches across the water towards each other, and where
the growth prevented them from meeting naturally, the roots had torn
themselves away from the ground, so that the branches might mingle their
foliage as they hung over the water.

Eliza bade the old woman farewell, and walked by the flowing river, till
she reached the shore of the open sea.

And there, before the young maiden's eyes, lay the glorious ocean, but
not a sail appeared on its surface, not even a boat could be seen. How
was she to go farther? She noticed how the countless pebbles on the
sea-shore had been smoothed and rounded by the action of the water.
Glass, iron, stones, everything that lay there mingled together, had
taken its shape from the same power, and felt as smooth, or even
smoother than her own delicate hand. "The water rolls on without
weariness," she said, "till all that is hard becomes smooth; so will I
be unwearied in my task. Thanks for your lessons, bright rolling waves;
my heart tells me you will lead me to my dear brothers."

On the foam-covered sea-weeds, lay eleven white swan feathers, which she
gathered up and placed together. Drops of water lay upon them; whether
they were dew-drops or tears no one could say. Lonely as it was on the
sea-shore, she did not observe it, for the ever-moving sea showed more
changes in a few hours than the most varying lake could produce during a
whole year. If a black heavy cloud arose, it was as if the sea said, "I
can look dark and angry too;" and then the wind blew, and the waves
turned to white foam as they rolled. When the wind slept, and the clouds
glowed with the red sunlight, then the sea looked like a rose leaf. But
however quietly its white glassy surface rested, there was still a
motion on the shore, as its waves rose and fell like the breast of a
sleeping child.

When the sun was about to set, Eliza saw eleven white swans with golden
crowns on their heads, flying towards the land, one behind the other,
like a long white ribbon. Then Eliza went down the slope from the shore,
and hid herself behind the bushes. The swans alighted quite close to her
and flapped their great white wings.

As soon as the sun had disappeared under the water, the feathers of the
swans fell off, and eleven beautiful princes, Eliza's brothers, stood
near her. She uttered a loud cry, for, although they were very much
changed, she knew them immediately. She sprang into their arms, and
called them each by name. Then, how happy the princes were at meeting
their little sister again, for they recognized her, although she had
grown so tall and beautiful. They laughed, and they wept, and very soon
understood how wickedly their mother had acted to them all.

"We brothers," said the eldest, "fly about as wild swans, so long as
the sun is in the sky; but as soon as it sinks behind the hills, we
recover our human shape. Therefore must we always be near a resting
place for our feet before sunset; for if we should be flying towards the
clouds at the time we recovered our natural shape as men, we should sink
deep into the sea. We do not dwell here, but in a land just as fair,
that lies beyond the ocean, which we have to cross for a long distance;
there is no island in our passage upon which we could pass, the night;
nothing but a little rock rising out of the sea, upon which we can
scarcely stand with safety, even closely crowded together. If the sea is
rough, the foam dashes over us, yet we thank God even for this rock; we
have passed whole nights upon it, or we should never have reached our
beloved fatherland, for our flight across the sea occupies two of the
longest days in the year. We have permission to visit out home once in
every year, and to remain eleven days, during which we fly across the
forest to look once more at the palace where our father dwells, and
where we were born, and at the church, where our mother lies buried.
Here it seems as if the very trees and bushes were related to us. The
wild horses leap over the plains as we have seen them in our childhood.
The charcoal burners sing the old songs, to which we have danced as
children. This is our fatherland, to which we are drawn by loving ties;
and here we have found you, our dear little sister., Two days longer we
can remain here, and then must we fly away to a beautiful land which is
not our home; and how can we take you with us? We have neither ship nor
boat."

"How can I break this spell?" said their sister.

And then she talked about it nearly the whole night, only slumbering for
a few hours.

Eliza was awakened by the rustling of the swans' wings as they soared
above. Her brothers were again changed to swans, and they flew in
circles wider and wider, till they were far away; but one of them, the
youngest swan, remained behind, and laid his head in his sister's lap,
while she stroked his wings; and they remained together the whole day.
Towards evening, the rest came back, and as the sun went down they
resumed their natural forms.

"To-morrow," said one, "we shall fly away, not to return again till a
whole year has passed. But we cannot leave you here. Have you courage to
go with us? My arm is strong enough to carry you through the wood; and
will not all our wings be strong enough to fly with you over the sea?"

"Yes, take me with you," said Eliza.

Then they spent the whole night in weaving a net with the pliant willow
and rushes. It was very large and strong. Eliza laid herself down on the
net, and when the sun rose, and her brothers again became wild swans,
they took up the net with their beaks, and flew up to the clouds with
their dear sister, who still slept. The sunbeams fell on her face,
therefore one of the swans soared over her head, so that his broad wings
might shade her.

They were far from the land when Eliza woke. She thought she must still
be dreaming, it seemed so strange to her to feel herself being carried
so high in the air over the sea. By her side lay a branch full of
beautiful ripe berries, and a bundle of sweet roots; the youngest of her
brothers had gathered them for her, and placed them by her side. She
smiled her thanks to him; she knew it was the same who had hovered over
her to shade her with his wings.

They were now so high, that a large ship beneath them looked like a
white sea-gull skimming the waves. A great cloud floating behind them
appeared like a vast mountain, and upon it Eliza saw her own shadow and
those of the eleven swans, looking gigantic in size. Altogether it
formed a more beautiful picture than she had ever seen; but as the sun
rose higher, and the clouds were left behind, the shadowy picture
vanished away.

Onward the whole day they flew through the air like a winged arrow, yet
more slowly than usual, for they had their sister to carry. The weather
seemed inclined to be stormy, and Eliza watched the sinking sun with
great anxiety, for the little rock in the ocean was not yet in sight. It
appeared to her as if the swans were making great efforts with their
wings. Alas! she was the cause of their not advancing more quickly. When
the sun set, they would change to men, fall into the sea and be drowned.
Then she offered a prayer from her inmost heart, but still no appearance
of the rock. Dark clouds came nearer, the gusts of wind told of a coming
storm, while from a thick, heavy mass of clouds the lightning burst
forth flash after flash.

The sun had reached the edge of the sea, when the swans darted down so
swiftly, that Eliza's head trembled; she believed they were falling,
but they again soared onward. Presently she caught sight of the rock
just below them, and by this time the sun was half hidden by the waves.
The rock did not appear larger than a seal's head thrust out of the
water. They sunk so rapidly, that at the moment their feet touched the
rock, it shone only like a star, and at last disappeared like the last
spark in a piece of burnt paper. Then she saw her brothers standing
closely round her with their arms linked together. There was but just
room enough for them, and not the smallest space to spare. The sea
dashed against the rock, and covered them with spray. The heavens were
lighted up with continual flashes, and peal after peal of thunder
rolled. But the sister and brothers sat holding each other's hands, and
singing hymns, from which they gained hope and courage.

In the early dawn the air became calm and still, and at sunrise the
swans flew away from the rock with Eliza. The sea was still rough, and
from their high position in the air, the white foam on the dark green
waves looked like millions of swans swimming on the water.

As the sun rose higher, Eliza saw before her, floating on the air, a
range of mountains, with shining masses of ice on their summits. In the
centre, rose a castle apparently a mile long, with rows of columns,
rising one above another, while, around it, palm-trees waved and flowers
bloomed as large as mill wheels. She asked if this was the land to which
they were hastening. The swans shook their heads, for what she beheld
were the beautiful ever-changing cloud palaces of the "Fata Morgana,"
into which no mortal can enter. Eliza was still gazing at the scene,
when mountains, forests, and castles melted away, and twenty stately
churches rose in their stead, with high towers and pointed gothic
windows. Eliza even fancied she could hear the tones of the organ, but
it was the music of the murmuring sea which she heard. As they drew
nearer to the churches, they also changed into a fleet of ships, which
seemed to be sailing beneath her; but as she looked again, she found it
was only a sea mist gliding over the ocean. So there continued to pass
before her eyes a constant change of scene, till at last she saw the
real land to which they were bound, with its blue mountains, its cedar
forests, and its cities and palaces. Long before the sun went down, she
sat on a rock, in front of a large cave, on the floor of which the
over-grown yet delicate green creeping plants looked like an embroidered
carpet.

"Now we shall expect to hear what you dream of to-night," said the
youngest brother, as he showed his sister her bedroom.

"Heaven grant that I may dream how to save you," she replied. And this
thought took such hold upon her mind that she prayed earnestly to God
for help, and even in her sleep she continued to pray. Then it appeared
to her as if she were flying high in the air, towards the cloudy palace
of the "Fata Morgana," and a fairy came out to meet her, radiant and
beautiful in appearance, and yet very much like the old woman who had
given her berries in the wood, and who had told her of the swans with
golden crowns on their heads.

"Your brothers can be released," said she, "if you have only courage
and perseverance. True, water is softer than your own delicate hands,
and yet it polishes stones into shapes; it feels no pain as your fingers
would feel, it has no soul, and cannot suffer such agony and torment as
you will have to endure. Do you see the stinging nettle which I hold in
my hand? Quantities of the same sort grow round the cave in which you
sleep, but none will be of any use to you unless they grow upon the
graves in a churchyard. These you must gather even while they burn
blisters on your hands. Break them to pieces with your hands and feet,
and they will become flax, from which you must spin and weave eleven
coats with long sleeves; if these are then thrown over the eleven swans,
the spell will be broken. But remember, that from the moment you
commence your task until it is finished, even should it occupy years of
your life, you must not speak. The first word you utter will pierce
through the hearts of your brothers like a deadly dagger. Their lives
hang upon your tongue. Remember all I have told you."

And as she finished speaking, she touched her hand lightly with the
nettle, and a pain, as of burning fire, awoke Eliza. It was broad
daylight, and close by where she had been sleeping lay a nettle like the
one she had seen in her dream. She fell on her knees and offered her
thanks to God. Then she went forth from the cave to begin her work with
her delicate hands.

She groped in amongst the ugly nettles, which burnt great blisters on
her hands and arms, but she determined to bear it gladly if she could
only release her dear brothers. So she bruised the nettles with her bare
feet and spun the flax.

At sunset her brothers returned and were very much frightened when they
found her dumb. They believed it to be some new sorcery of their wicked
step-mother. But when they saw her hands they understood what she was
doing on their behalf, and the youngest brother wept, and where his
tears fell the pain ceased, and the burning blisters vanished.

She kept to her work all night, for she could not rest till she had
released her dear brothers. During the whole of the following day, while
her brothers were absent, she sat in solitude, but never before had the
time flown so quickly. One coat was already finished and she had begun
the second, when she heard the huntsman's horn, and was struck with
fear.

The sound came nearer and nearer, she heard the dogs barking, and fled
with terror into the cave. She hastily bound together the nettles she
had gathered into a bundle and sat upon them.

Immediately a great dog came bounding towards her out of the ravine, and
then another and another; they barked loudly, ran back, and then came
again. In a very few minutes all the huntsmen stood before the cave, and
the handsomest of them was the king of the country. He advanced towards
her, for he had never seen a more beautiful maiden.

"How did you come here, my sweet child?" he asked. But Eliza shook her
head. She dared not speak, at the cost of her brothers' lives. And she
hid her hands under her apron, so that the king might not see how she
must be suffering.

"Come with me," he said; "here you cannot remain. If you are as good
as you are beautiful, I will dress you in silk and velvet, I will place
a golden crown upon your head, and you shall dwell, and rule, and make
your home in my richest castle." And then he lifted her on his horse.
She wept and wrung her hands, but the king said, "I wish only for your
happiness. A time will come when you will thank me for this." And then
he galloped away over the mountains, holding her before him on this
horse, and the hunters followed behind them.

As the sun went down, they approached a fair royal city, with churches,
and cupolas. On arriving at the castle the king led her into marble
halls, where large fountains played, and where the walls and the
ceilings were covered with rich paintings. But she had no eyes for all
these glorious sights, she could only mourn and weep. Patiently she
allowed the women to array her in royal robes, to weave pearls in her
hair, and draw soft gloves over her blistered fingers.

As she stood before them in all her rich dress, she looked so dazzingly
beautiful that the court bowed low in her presence. Then the king
declared his intention of making her his bride, but the archbishop shook
his head, and whispered that the fair young maiden was only a witch who
had blinded the king's eyes and bewitched his heart.

But the king would not listen to this; he ordered the music to sound,
the daintiest dishes to be served, and the loveliest maidens to dance.
After-wards he led her through fragrant gardens and lofty halls, but not
a smile appeared on her lips or sparkled in her eyes. She looked the
very picture of grief. Then the king opened the door of a little chamber
in which she was to sleep; it was adorned with rich green tapestry, and
resembled the cave in which he had found her. On the floor lay the
bundle of flax which she had spun from the nettles, and under the
ceiling hung the coat she had made. These things had been brought away
from the cave as curiosities by one of the huntsmen.

"Here you can dream yourself back again in the old home in the cave,"
said the king; "here is the work with which you employed yourself. It
will amuse you now in the midst of all this splendor to think of that
time."

When Eliza saw all these things which lay so near her heart, a smile
played around her mouth, and the crimson blood rushed to her cheeks. She
thought of her brothers, and their release made her so joyful that she
kissed the king's hand. Then he pressed her to his heart. Very soon the
joyous church bells announced the marriage feast, and that the beautiful
dumb girl out of the wood was to be made the queen of the country.

Then the archbishop whispered wicked words in the king's ear, but they
did not sink into his heart. The marriage was still to take place, and
the archbishop himself had to place the crown on the bride's head; in
his wicked spite, he pressed the narrow circlet so tightly on her
forehead that it caused her pain. But a heavier weight encircled her
heart-- sorrow for her brothers. She felt not bodily pain. Her mouth was
closed; a single word would cost the lives of her brothers. But she
loved the kind, handsome king, who did everything to make her happy more
and more each day; she loved him with all her heart, and her eyes beamed
with the love she dared not speak. Oh! if she had only been able to
confide in him and tell him of her grief. But dumb she must remain till
her task was finished. Therefore at night she crept away into her little
chamber, which had been decked out to look like the cave, and quickly
wove one coat after another. But when she began the seventh she found
she had no more flax.

She knew that the nettles she wanted to use grew in the churchyard, and
that she must pluck them herself. How should she get out there?

"Oh, what is the pain in my fingers to the torment which my heart
endures?" said she. "I must venture, I shall not be denied help from
heaven." Then with a trembling heart, as if she were about to perform a
wicked deed, she crept into the garden in the broad moonlight, and
passed through the narrow walks and the deserted streets, till she
reached the churchyard. Then she saw on one of the broad tombstones a
group of ghouls. These hideous creatures took off their rags, as if they
intended to bathe, and then clawing open the fresh graves with their
long, skinny fingers, pulled out the dead bodies and ate the flesh!
Eliza had to pass close by them, and they fixed their wicked glances
upon her, but she prayed silently, gathered the burning nettles, and
carried them home with her to the castle.

One person only had seen her, and that was the archbishop-- he was awake
while everybody was asleep. Now he thought his opinion was evidently
correct. All was not right with the queen. She was a witch, and had
bewitched the king and all the people.

Secretly he told the king what he had seen and what he feared, and as
the hard words came from his tongue, the carved images of the saints
shook their heads as if they would say. "It is not so. Eliza is
innocent." But the archbishop interpreted it in another way; he
believed that they witnessed against her, and were shaking their heads
at her wickedness. Two large tears rolled down the king's cheeks, and
he went home with doubt in his heart, and at night he pretended to
sleep, but there came no real sleep to his eyes, for he saw Eliza get up
every night and disappear in her own chamber.

From day to day his brow became darker, and Eliza saw it and did not
understand the reason, but it alarmed her and made her heart tremble for
her brothers. Her hot tears glittered like pearls on the regal velvet
and diamonds, while all who saw her were wishing they could be queens.
In the mean time she had almost finished her task; only one coat of mail
was wanting, but she had no flax left, and not a single nettle. Once
more only, and for the last time, must she venture to the churchyard and
pluck a few handfuls. She thought with terror of the solitary walk, and
of the horrible ghouls, but her will was firm, as well as her trust in
Providence.

Eliza went, and the king and the archbishop followed her. They saw her
vanish through the wicket gate into the churchyard, and when they came
nearer they saw the ghouls sitting on the tombstone, as Eliza had seen
them, and the king turned away his head, for he thought she was with
them-- she whose head had rested on his breast that very evening.

"The people must condemn her," said he, and she was very quickly
condemned by every one to suffer death by fire.

Away from the gorgeous regal halls was she led to a dark, dreary cell,
where the wind whistled through the iron bars. Instead of the velvet and
silk dresses, they gave her the coats of mail which she had woven to
cover her, and the bundle of nettles for a pillow; but nothing they
could give her would have pleased her more. She continued her task with
joy, and prayed for help, while the street-boys sang jeering songs about
her, and not a soul comforted her with a kind word.

Towards evening, she heard at the grating the flutter of a swan's wing,
it was her youngest brother-- he had found his sister, and she sobbed
for joy, although she knew that very likely this would be the last night
she would have to live. But still she could hope, for her task was
almost finished, and her brothers were come.

Then the archbishop arrived, to be with her during her last hours, as he
had promised the king. But she shook her head, and begged him, by looks
and gestures, not to stay; for in this night she knew she must finish
her task, otherwise all her pain and tears and sleepless nights would
have been suffered in vain. The archbishop withdrew, uttering bitter
words against her; but poor Eliza knew that she was innocent, and
diligently continued her work.

The little mice ran about the floor, they dragged the nettles to her
feet, to help as well as they could; and the thrush sat outside the
grating of the window, and sang to her the whole night long, as sweetly
as possible, to keep up her spirits.

It was still twilight, and at least an hour before sunrise, when the
eleven brothers stood at the castle gate, and demanded to be brought
before the king. They were told it could not be, it was yet almost
night, and as the king slept they dared not disturb him. They
threatened, they entreated. Then the guard appeared, and even the king
himself, inquiring what all the noise meant. At this moment the sun
rose. The eleven brothers were seen no more, but eleven wild swans flew
away over the castle.

And now all the people came streaming forth from the gates of the city,
to see the witch burnt. An old horse drew the cart on which she sat.
They had dressed her in a garment of coarse sackcloth. Her lovely hair
hung loose on her shoulders, her cheeks were deadly pale, her lips moved
silently, while her fingers still worked at the green flax. Even on the
way to death, she would not give up her task. The ten coats of mail lay
at her feet, she was working hard at the eleventh, while the mob jeered
her and said,

"See the witch, how she mutters! She has no hymn-book in her hand. She
sits there with her ugly sorcery. Let us tear it in a thousand pieces."

And then they pressed towards her, and would have destroyed the coats of
mail, but at the same moment eleven wild swans flew over her, and
alighted on the cart. Then they flapped their large wings, and the crowd
drew on one side in alarm.

"It is a sign from heaven that she is innocent," whispered many of
them; but they ventured not to say it aloud.

As the executioner seized her by the hand, to lift her out of the cart,
she hastily threw the eleven coats of mail over the swans, and they
immediately became eleven handsome princes; but the youngest had a
swan's wing, instead of an arm; for she had not been able to finish the
last sleeve of the coat.

"Now I may speak," she exclaimed. "I am innocent."

Then the people, who saw what happened, bowed to her, as before a saint;
but she sank lifeless in her brothers' arms, overcome with suspense,
anguish, and pain.

"Yes, she is innocent," said the eldest brother; and then he related
all that had taken place; and while he spoke there rose in the air a
fragrance as from millions of roses. Every piece of faggot in the pile
had taken root, and threw out branches, and appeared a thick hedge,
large and high, covered with roses; while above all bloomed a white and
shining flower, that glittered like a star. This flower the king
plucked, and placed in Eliza's bosom, when she awoke from her swoon,
with peace and happiness in her heart.

And all the church bells rang of themselves, and the birds came in great
troops. And a marriage procession returned to the castle, such as no
king had ever before seen.
