# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_silent_book
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The silent book 

On the highroad in the forest there stood a lonely farmhouse; the road
passed right through its courtyard.

All the windows were open to the warm sun; within the house there was
bustling life, but out in the yard, under an arbor of blooming lilacs,
there rested an open coffin. The dead man had been carried to it, and
this morning he was to be buried. There was no one to stand by the
coffin and look down in sorrow at the dead, no one to shed a tear over
him.

A white cloth covered his face, and under his head lay a great thick
book, its leaves formed of whole sheets of gray paper. And between each
leaf there lay withered flowers, kept close and hidden, so that the book
was really a complete herbarium, gathered in many different places. His
request had been that the book be buried with him, for each flower had
formed a chapter of his life.

"Who is the dead man?" we asked; and the answer was:

"The old student of Upsala. They say he was once a brilliant man who
knew foreign languages and could sing and write songs, too. But it was
also said that something went wrong with him, and he wasted his thoughts
and himself in drinking. Finally, when his health was gone he came out
here to the country, where some kindly person paid his board and
lodging. He was as gentle as a child, but when his dark moods came on
him he became as strong as a giant and ran about the forest like a
hunted beast. But if we could manage to get him home and persuade him to
open the book with the withered flowers, he would sit quietly all day
long, looking at one flower after another, and often the tears rolled
down his cheeks. God only knows what thoughts those flowers brought back
to him. But he begged that the book be laid in the coffin with him, so
there it is. In a little while we'll nail the lid down, and then he
will have his sweet rest in the grave."

We lifted up the cloth; there was a peaceful look on the face of the
dead man; a ray of sunshine flickered across it. A swallow darted
swiftly into the arbor and wheeled rapidly, twittering above the dead
man's head.

Surely we all know that strange feeling when we take out old letters of
our youth and read them. All the hopes and sorrows of our life seem to
rise up before us again. How many of those whom we then knew and were on
intimate terms with are dead to us now! Yet they are still alive,
although for a long time they have not been in our thoughts - those whom
we once thought we should cling to forever, and share their joys and
sorrows.

The faded oak leaf in that silent book is the memento of a friend, the
school friend who was to remain a friend for life. He himself had
fastened that leaf in the student's cap in the green forest long ago,
when that lifelong bond of friendship was made. Where is that friend
now? The leaf is kept; the bond-broken.

Here is a foreign hothouse plant, far too tender for the gardens of the
North; its fresh odor seems to cling to it still. The daughter of a
noble house gave it to him out of her own garden.

Here is a water lily that he himself plucked, and watered with his
bitter tears, a water lily of sweet waters. And what do the leaves of
this nettle tell us? What were his thoughts when he plucked it and laid
it away?

Here are lilies of the valley from the dark solitudes of the forest,
honeysuckle from the taproom flowerpot, and here the sharp, bare grass
blade.

Gently the blooming lilac bends its fresh and fragrant clusters over the
dead man's head; the swallow darts by again - "Quivit! Quivit!" Now
the men come with nails and hammer; the lid is laid over the dead, who
rests his head silently on the silent book.

Hidden - forgotten!
