# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_old_street_lamp
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The old street lamp 

Did you ever hear the story of the old street lamp? It is not remarkably
interesting, but for once in a way you may as well listen to it. It was
a most respectable old lamp, which had seen many, many years of service,
and now was to retire with a pension. It was this evening at its post
for the last time, giving light to the street. His feelings were
something like those of an old dancer at the theatre, who is dancing for
the last time, and knows that on the morrow she will be in her garret,
alone and forgotten. The lamp had very great anxiety about the next day,
for he knew that he had to appear for the first time at the town hall,
to be inspected by the mayor and the council, who were to decide if he
were fit for further service or not;-- whether the lamp was good enough
to be used to light the inhabitants of one of the suburbs, or in the
country, at some factory; and if not, it would be sent at once to an
iron foundry, to be melted down. In this latter case it might be turned
into anything, and he wondered very much whether he would then be able
to remember that he had once been a street lamp, and it troubled him
exceedingly. Whatever might happen, one thing seemed certain, that he
would be separated from the watchman and his wife, whose family he
looked upon as his own. The lamp had first been hung up on that very
evening that the watchman, then a robust young man, had entered upon the
duties of his office. Ah, well, it was a very long time since one became
a lamp and the other a watchman. His wife had a little pride in those
days; she seldom condescended to glance at the lamp, excepting when she
passed by in the evening, never in the daytime. But in later years, when
all these,-- the watchman, the wife, and the lamp-- had grown old, she
had attended to it, cleaned it, and supplied it with oil. The old people
were thoroughly honest, they had never cheated the lamp of a single drop
of the oil provided for it.

This was the lamp's last night in the street, and to-morrow he must go
to the town-hall,-- two very dark things to think of. No wonder he did
not burn brightly. Many other thoughts also passed through his mind. How
many persons he had lighted on their way, and how much he had seen; as
much, very likely, as the mayor and corporation themselves! None of
these thoughts were uttered aloud, however; for he was a good, honorable
old lamp, who would not willingly do harm to any one, especially to
those in authority. As many things were recalled to his mind, the light
would flash up with sudden brightness; he had, at such moments, a
conviction that he would be remembered. "There was a handsome young man
once," thought he; "it is certainly a long while ago, but I remember
he had a little note, written on pink paper with a gold edge; the
writing was elegant, evidently a lady's hand: twice he read it through,
and kissed it, and then looked up at me, with eyes that said quite
plainly, 'I am the happiest of men!' Only he and I know what was
written on this his first letter from his lady-love. Ah, yes, and there
was another pair of eyes that I remember,-- it is really wonderful how
the thoughts jump from one thing to another! A funeral passed through
the street; a young and beautiful woman lay on a bier, decked with
garlands of flowers, and attended by torches, which quite overpowered my
light. All along the street stood the people from the houses, in crowds,
ready to join the procession. But when the torches had passed from
before me, and I could look round, I saw one person alone, standing,
leaning against my post, and weeping. Never shall I forget the sorrowful
eyes that looked up at me." These and similar reflections occupied the
old street lamp, on this the last time that his light would shine. The
sentry, when he is relieved from his post, knows at least who will
succeed him, and may whisper a few words to him, but the lamp did not
know his successor, or he could have given him a few hints respecting
rain, or mist, and could have informed him how far the moon's rays
would rest on the pavement, and from which side the wind generally blew,
and so on.

On the bridge over the canal stood three persons, who wished to
recommend themselves to the lamp, for they thought he could give the
office to whomsoever he chose. The first was a herring's head, which
could emit light in the darkness. He remarked that it would be a great
saving of oil if they placed him on the lamp-post. Number two was a
piece of rotten wood, which also shines in the dark. He considered
himself descended from an old stem, once the pride of the forest. The
third was a glow-worm, and how he found his way there the lamp could not
imagine, yet there he was, and could really give light as well as the
others. But the rotten wood and the herring's head declared most
solemnly, by all they held sacred, that the glow-worm only gave light at
certain times, and must not be allowed to compete with themselves. The
old lamp assured them that not one of them could give sufficient light
to fill the position of a street lamp; but they would believe nothing he
said. And when they discovered that he had not the power of naming his
successor, they said they were very glad to hear it, for the lamp was
too old and worn-out to make a proper choice.

At this moment the wind came rushing round the corner of the street, and
through the air-holes of the old lamp. "What is this I hear?" said he;
"that you are going away to-morrow? Is this evening the last time we
shall meet? Then I must present you with a farewell gift. I will blow
into your brain, so that in future you shall not only be able to
remember all that you have seen or heard in the past, but your light
within shall be so bright, that you shall be able to understand all that
is said or done in your presence."

"Oh, that is really a very, very great gift," said the old lamp; "I
thank you most heartily. I only hope I shall not be melted down."

"That is not likely to happen yet," said the wind; "and I will also
blow a memory into you, so that should you receive other similar
presents your old age will pass very pleasantly."

"That is if I am not melted down," said the lamp. "But should I in
that case still retain my memory?"

"Do be reasonable, old lamp," said the wind, puffing away.

At this moment the moon burst forth from the clouds. "What will you
give the old lamp?" asked the wind.

"I can give nothing," she replied; "I am on the wane, and no lamps
have ever given me light while I have frequently shone upon them." And
with these words the moon hid herself again behind the clouds, that she
might be saved from further importunities. Just then a drop fell upon
the lamp, from the roof of the house, but the drop explained that he was
a gift from those gray clouds, and perhaps the best of all gifts. "I
shall penetrate you so thoroughly," he said, "that you will have the
power of becoming rusty, and, if you wish it, to crumble into dust in
one night."

But this seemed to the lamp a very shabby present, and the wind thought
so too. "Does no one give any more? Will no one give any more?"
shouted the breath of the wind, as loud as it could. Then a bright
falling star came down, leaving a broad, luminous streak behind it.

"What was that?" cried the herring's head. "Did not a star fall? I
really believe it went into the lamp. Certainly, when such high-born
personages try for the office, we may as well say 'Good-night,' and go
home."

And so they did, all three, while the old lamp threw a wonderfully
strong light all around him.

"This is a glorious gift," said he; "the bright stars have always
been a joy to me, and have always shone more brilliantly than I ever
could shine, though I have tried with my whole might; and now they have
noticed me, a poor old lamp, and have sent me a gift that will enable me
to see clearly everything that I remember, as if it still stood before
me, and to be seen by all those who love me. And herein lies the truest
pleasure, for joy which we cannot share with others is only half
enjoyed."

"That sentiment does you honor," said the wind; "but for this purpose
wax lights will be necessary. If these are not lighted in you, your
particular faculties will not benefit others in the least. The stars
have not thought of this; they suppose that you and every other light
must be a wax taper: but I must go down now." So he laid himself to
rest.

"Wax tapers, indeed!" said the lamp, "I have never yet had these, nor
is it likely I ever shall. If I could only be sure of not being melted
down!"

The next day. Well, perhaps we had better pass over the next day. The
evening had come, and the lamp was resting in a grandfather's chair,
and guess where! Why, at the old watchman's house. He had begged, as a
favor, that the mayor and corporation would allow him to keep the street
lamp, in consideration of his long and faithful service, as he had
himself hung it up and lit it on the day he first commenced his duties,
four-and-twenty years ago. He looked upon it almost as his own child; he
had no children, so the lamp was given to him. There it lay in the great
arm-chair near to the warm stove. It seemed almost as if it had grown
larger, for it appeared quite to fill the chair. The old people sat at
their supper, casting friendly glances at the old lamp, whom they would
willingly have admitted to a place at the table. It is quite true that
they dwelt in a cellar, two yards deep in the earth, and they had to
cross a stone passage to get to their room, but within it was warm and
comfortable and strips of list had been nailed round the door. The bed
and the little window had curtains, and everything looked clean and
neat. On the window seat stood two curious flower-pots which a sailor,
named Christian, had brought over from the East or West Indies. They
were of clay, and in the form of two elephants, with open backs; they
were hollow and filled with earth, and through the open space flowers
bloomed. In one grew some very fine chives or leeks; this was the
kitchen garden. The other elephant, which contained a beautiful
geranium, they called their flower garden. On the wall hung a large
colored print, representing the congress of Vienna, and all the kings
and emperors at once. A clock, with heavy weights, hung on the wall and
went "tick, tick," steadily enough; yet it was always rather too fast,
which, however, the old people said was better than being too slow. They
were now eating their supper, while the old street lamp, as we have
heard, lay in the grandfather's arm-chair near the stove. It seemed to
the lamp as if the whole world had turned round; but after a while the
old watchman looked at the lamp, and spoke of what they had both gone
through together,-- in rain and in fog; during the short bright nights
of summer, or in the long winter nights, through the drifting
snow-storms, when he longed to be at home in the cellar. Then the lamp
felt it was all right again. He saw everything that had happened quite
clearly, as if it were passing before him. Surely the wind had given him
an excellent gift. The old people were very active and industrious, they
were never idle for even a single hour. On Sunday afternoons they would
bring out some books, generally a book of travels which they were very
fond of. The old man would read aloud about Africa, with its great
forests and the wild elephants, while his wife would listen attentively,
stealing a glance now and then at the clay elephants, which served as
flower-pots.

"I can almost imagine I am seeing it all," she said; and then how the
lamp wished for a wax taper to be lighted in him, for then the old woman
would have seen the smallest detail as clearly as he did himself. The
lofty trees, with their thickly entwined branches, the naked negroes on
horseback, and whole herds of elephants treading down bamboo thickets
with their broad, heavy feet.

"What is the use of all my capabilities," sighed the old lamp, "when
I cannot obtain any wax lights; they have only oil and tallow here, and
these will not do." One day a great heap of wax-candle ends found their
way into the cellar. The larger pieces were burnt, and the smaller ones
the old woman kept for waxing her thread. So there were now candles
enough, but it never occurred to any one to put a little piece in the
lamp.

"Here I am now with my rare powers," thought the lamp, "I have
faculties within me, but I cannot share them; they do not know that I
could cover these white walls with beautiful tapestry, or change them
into noble forests, or, indeed, to anything else they might wish for."
The lamp, however, was always kept clean and shining in a corner where
it attracted all eyes. Strangers looked upon it as lumber, but the old
people did not care for that; they loved the lamp. One day-- it was the
watchman's birthday-- the old woman approached the lamp, smiling to
herself, and said, "I will have an illumination to-day in honor of my
old man." And the lamp rattled in his metal frame, for he thought,
"Now at last I shall have a light within me," but after all no wax
light was placed in the lamp, but oil as usual. The lamp burned through
the whole evening, and began to perceive too clearly that the gift of
the stars would remain a hidden treasure all his life. Then he had a
dream; for, to one with his faculties, dreaming was no difficulty. It
appeared to him that the old people were dead, and that he had been
taken to the iron foundry to be melted down. It caused him quite as much
anxiety as on the day when he had been called upon to appear before the
mayor and the council at the town-hall. But though he had been endowed
with the power of falling into decay from rust when he pleased, he did
not make use of it. He was therefore put into the melting-furnace and
changed into as elegant an iron candlestick as you could wish to see,
one intended to hold a wax taper. The candlestick was in the form of an
angel holding a nosegay, in the centre of which the wax taper was to be
placed. It was to stand on a green writing table, in a very pleasant
room; many books were scattered about, and splendid paintings hung on
the walls. The owner of the room was a poet, and a man of intellect;
everything he thought or wrote was pictured around him. Nature showed
herself to him sometimes in the dark forests, at others in cheerful
meadows where the storks were strutting about, or on the deck of a ship
sailing across the foaming sea with the clear, blue sky above, or at
night the glittering stars. "What powers I possess!" said the lamp,
awaking from his dream; "I could almost wish to be melted down; but no,
that must not be while the old people live. They love me for myself
alone, they keep me bright, and supply me with oil. I am as well off as
the picture of the congress, in which they take so much pleasure." And
from that time he felt at rest in himself, and not more so than such an
honorable old lamp really deserved to be.
