# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_marsh_kings_daughter
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The marsh king's daughter 

The storks relate to their little ones a great many stories, and they
are all about moors and reed banks, and suited to their age and
capacity. The youngest of them are quite satisfied with "kribble,
krabble," or such nonsense, and think it very grand; but the elder ones
want something with a deeper meaning, or at least something about their
own family.

We are only acquainted with one of the two longest and oldest stories
which the storks relate-- it is about Moses, who was exposed by his
mother on the banks of the Nile, and was found by the king's daughter,
who gave him a good education, and he afterwards became a great man; but
where he was buried is still unknown.

Every one knows this story, but not the second; very likely because it
is quite an inland story. It has been repeated from mouth to mouth, from
one stork-mamma to another, for thousands of years; and each has told it
better than the last; and now we mean to tell it better than all.

The first stork pair who related it lived at the time it happened, and
had their summer residence on the rafters of the Viking's house, which
stood near the wild moorlands of Wendsyssell; that is, to speak more
correctly, the great moorheath, high up in the north of Jutland, by the
Skjagen peak. This wilderness is still an immense wild heath of marshy
ground, about which we can read in the "Official Directory." It is
said that in olden times the place was a lake, the ground of which had
heaved up from beneath, and now the moorland extends for miles in every
direction, and is surrounded by damp meadows, trembling, undulating
swamps, and marshy ground covered with turf, on which grow bilberry
bushes and stunted trees. Mists are almost always hovering over this
region, which, seventy years ago, was overrun with wolves. It may well
be called the Wild Moor; and one can easily imagine, with such a wild
expanse of marsh and lake, how lonely and dreary it must have been a
thousand years ago. Many things may be noticed now that existed then.
The reeds grow to the same height, and bear the same kind of long,
purple-brown leaves, with their feathery tips. There still stands the
birch, with its white bark and its delicate, loosely hanging leaves; and
with regard to the living beings who frequented this spot, the fly still
wears a gauzy dress of the same cut, and the favorite colors of the
stork are white, with black and red for stockings. The people,
certainly, in those days, wore very different dresses to those they now
wear, but if any of them, be he huntsman or squire, master or servant,
ventured on the wavering, undulating, marshy ground of the moor, they
met with the same fate a thousand years ago as they would now. The
wanderer sank, and went down to the Marsh King, as he is named, who
rules in the great moorland empire beneath. They also called him
"Gunkel King," but we like the name of "Marsh King" better, and we
will give him that name as the storks do. Very little is known of the
Marsh King's rule, but that, perhaps, is a good thing.

In the neighborhood of the moorlands, and not far from the great arm of
the North Sea and the Cattegat which is called the Lumfjorden, lay the
castle of the Viking, with its water-tight stone cellars, its tower, and
its three projecting storeys. On the ridge of the roof the stork had
built his nest, and there the stork-mamma sat on her eggs and felt sure
her hatching would come to something.

One evening, stork-papa stayed out rather late, and when he came home he
seemed quite busy, bustling, and important. "I have something very
dreadful to tell you," said he to the stork-mamma.

"Keep it to yourself then," she replied. "Remember that I am hatching
eggs; it may agitate me, and will affect them."

"You must know it at once," said he. "The daughter of our host in
Egypt has arrived here. She has ventured to take this journey, and now
she is lost."

"She who sprung from the race of the fairies, is it?" cried the mother
stork. "Oh, tell me all about it; you know I cannot bear to be kept
waiting at a time when I am hatching eggs."

"Well, you see, mother," he replied, "she believed what the doctors
said, and what I have heard you state also, that the moor-flowers which
grow about here would heal her sick father; and she has flown to the
north in swan's plumage, in company with some other swan-princesses,
who come to these parts every year to renew their youth. She came, and
where is she now!"

"You enter into particulars too much," said the mamma stork, "and the
eggs may take cold; I cannot bear such suspense as this."

"Well," said he, "I have kept watch; and this evening I went among
the rushes where I thought the marshy ground would bear me, and while I
was there three swans came. Something in their manner of flying seemed
to say to me, 'Look carefully now; there is one not all swan, only
swan's feathers.' You know, mother, you have the same intuitive
feeling that I have; you know whether a thing is right or not
immediately."

"Yes, of course," said she; "but tell me about the princess; I am
tired of hearing about the swan's feathers."

"Well, you know that in the middle of the moor there is something like
a lake," said the stork-papa. "You can see the edge of it if you raise
yourself a little. Just there, by the reeds and the green banks, lay the
trunk of an elder-tree; upon this the three swans stood flapping their
wings, and looking about them; one of them threw off her plumage, and I
immediately recognized her as one of the princesses of our home in
Egypt. There she sat, without any covering but her long, black hair. I
heard her tell the two others to take great care of the swan's plumage,
while she dipped down into the water to pluck the flowers which she
fancied she saw there. The others nodded, and picked up the feather
dress, and took possession of it. I wonder what will become of it?
thought I, and she most likely asked herself the same question. If so,
she received an answer, a very practical one; for the two swans rose up
and flew away with her swan's plumage. 'Dive down now!' they cried;
'thou shalt never more fly in the swan's plumage, thou shalt never
again see Egypt; here, on the moor, thou wilt remain.' So saying, they
tore the swan's plumage into a thousand pieces, the feathers drifted
about like a snow-shower, and then the two deceitful princesses flew
away."

"Why, that is terrible," said the stork-mamma; "I feel as if I could
hardly bear to hear any more, but you must tell me what happened next."

"The princess wept and lamented aloud; her tears moistened the elder
stump, which was really not an elder stump but the Marsh King himself,
he who in marshy ground lives and rules. I saw myself how the stump of
the tree turned round, and was a tree no more, while long, clammy
branches like arms, were extended from it. Then the poor child was
terribly frightened, and started up to run away. She hastened to cross
the green, slimy ground; but it will not bear any weight, much less
hers. She quickly sank, and the elder stump dived immediately after her;
in fact, it was he who drew her down. Great black bubbles rose up out of
the moor-slime, and with these every trace of the two vanished. And now
the princess is buried in the wild marsh, she will never now carry
flowers to Egypt to cure her father. It would have broken your heart,
mother, had you seen it."

"You ought not to have told me," said she, "at such a time as this;
the eggs might suffer. But I think the princess will soon find help;
some one will rise up to help her. Ah! if it had been you or I, or one
of our people, it would have been all over with us."

"I mean to go every day," said he, "to see if anything comes to
pass;" and so he did.

A long time went by, but at last he saw a green stalk shooting up out of
the deep, marshy ground. As it reached the surface of the marsh, a leaf
spread out, and unfolded itself broader and broader, and close to it
came forth a bud.

One morning, when the stork-papa was flying over the stem, he saw that
the power of the sun's rays had caused the bud to open, and in the cup
of the flower lay a charming child-- a little maiden, looking as if she
had just come out of a bath. The little one was so like the Egyptian
princess, that the stork, at the first moment, thought it must be the
princess herself, but after a little reflection he decided that it was
much more likely to be the daughter of the princess and the Marsh King;
and this explained also her being placed in the cup of a water-lily.
"But she cannot be left to lie here," thought the stork, "and in my
nest there are already so many. But stay, I have thought of something:
the wife of the Viking has no children, and how often she has wished for
a little one. People always say the stork brings the little ones; I will
do so in earnest this time. I shall fly with the child to the Viking's
wife; what rejoicing there will be!"

And then the stork lifted the little girl out of the flower-cup, flew to
the castle, picked a hole with his beak in the bladder-covered, window,
and laid the beautiful child in the bosom of the Viking's wife. Then he
flew back quickly to the stork-mamma and told her what he had seen and
done; and the little storks listened to it all, for they were then quite
old enough to do so. "So you see," he continued, "that the princess
is not dead, for she must have sent her little one up here; and now I
have found a home for her."

"Ah, I said it would be so from the first," replied the stork-mamma;
"but now think a little of your own family. Our travelling time draws
near, and I sometimes feel a little irritation already under the wings.
The cuckoos and the nightingale are already gone, and I heard the quails
say they should go too as soon as the wind was favorable. Our youngsters
will go through all the manoeuvres at the review very well, or I am much
mistaken in them."

The Viking's wife was above measure delighted when she awoke the next
morning and found the beautiful little child lying in her bosom. She
kissed it and caressed it; but it cried terribly, and struck out with
its arms and legs, and did not seem to be pleased at all. At last it
cried itself to sleep; and as it lay there so still and quiet, it was a
most beautiful sight to see. The Viking's wife was so delighted, that
body and soul were full of joy. Her heart felt so light within her, that
it seemed as if her husband and his soldiers, who were absent, must come
home as suddenly and unexpectedly as the little child had done. She and
her whole household therefore busied themselves in preparing everything
for the reception of her lord. The long, colored tapestry, on which she
and her maidens had worked pictures of their idols, Odin, Thor, and
Friga, was hung up. The slaves polished the old shields that served as
ornaments; cushions were placed on the seats, and dry wood laid on the
fireplaces in the centre of the hall, so that the flames might be fanned
up at a moment's notice. The Viking's wife herself assisted in the
work, so that at night she felt very tired, and quickly fell into a
sound sleep. When she awoke, just before morning, she was terribly
alarmed to find that the infant had vanished. She sprang from her couch,
lighted a pine-chip, and searched all round the room, when, at last, in
that part of the bed where her feet had been, lay, not the child, but a
great, ugly frog. She was quite disgusted at this sight, and seized a
heavy stick to kill the frog; but the creature looked at her with such
strange, mournful eyes, that she was unable to strike the blow. Once
more she searched round the room; then she started at hearing the frog
utter a low, painful croak. She sprang from the couch and opened the
window hastily; at the same moment the sun rose, and threw its beams
through the window, till it rested on the couch where the great frog
lay. Suddenly it appeared as if the frog's broad mouth contracted, and
became small and red. The limbs moved and stretched out and extended
themselves till they took a beautiful shape; and behold there was the
pretty child lying before her, and the ugly frog was gone. "How is
this?" she cried, "have I had a wicked dream? Is it not my own lovely
cherub that lies there." Then she kissed it and fondled it; but the
child struggled and fought, and bit as if she had been a little wild
cat.

The Viking did not return on that day, nor the next; he was, however, on
the way home; but the wind, so favorable to the storks, was against him;
for it blew towards the south. A wind in favor of one is often against
another.

After two or three days had passed, it became clear to the Viking's
wife how matters stood with the child; it was under the influence of a
powerful sorcerer. By day it was charming in appearance as an angel of
light, but with a temper wicked and wild; while at night, in the form of
an ugly frog, it was quiet and mournful, with eyes full of sorrow. Here
were two natures, changing inwardly and outwardly with the absence and
return of sunlight. And so it happened that by day the child, with the
actual form of its mother, possessed the fierce disposition of its
father; at night, on the contrary, its outward appearance plainly showed
its descent on the father's side, while inwardly it had the heart and
mind of its mother. Who would be able to loosen this wicked charm which
the sorcerer had worked upon it? The wife of the Viking lived in
constant pain and sorrow about it. Her heart clung to the little
creature, but she could not explain to her husband the circumstances in
which it was placed. He was expected to return shortly; and were she to
tell him, he would very likely, as was the custom at that time, expose
the poor child in the public highway, and let any one take it away who
would. The good wife of the Viking could not let that happen, and she
therefore resolved that the Viking should never see the child excepting
by daylight.

One morning there sounded a rushing of storks' wings over the roof.
More than a hundred pair of storks had rested there during the night, to
recover themselves after their excursion; and now they soared aloft, and
prepared for the journey southward.

"All the husbands are here, and ready!" they cried; "wives and
children also!"

"How light we are!" screamed the young storks in chorus. "Something
pleasant seems creeping over us, even down to our toes, as if we were
full of live frogs. Ah, how delightful it is to travel into foreign
lands!"

"Hold yourselves properly in the line with us," cried papa and mamma.
"Do not use your beaks so much; it tries the lungs." And then the
storks flew away.

About the same time sounded the clang of the warriors' trumpets across
the heath. The Viking had landed with his men. They were returning home,
richly laden with spoil from the Gallic coast, where the people, as did
also the inhabitants of Britain, often cried in alarm, "Deliver us from
the wild northmen."

Life and noisy pleasure came with them into the castle of the Viking on
the moorland. A great cask of mead was drawn into the hall, piles of
wood blazed, cattle were slain and served up, that they might feast in
reality, The priest who offered the sacrifice sprinkled the devoted
parishioners with the warm blood; the fire crackled, and the smoke
rolled along beneath the roof; the soot fell upon them from the beams;
but they were used to all these things. Guests were invited, and
received handsome presents. All wrongs and unfaithfulness were
forgotten. They drank deeply, and threw in each other's faces the bones
that were left, which was looked upon as a sign of good feeling amongst
them. A bard, who was a kind of musician as well as warrior, and who had
been with the Viking in his expedition, and knew what to sing about,
gave them one of his best songs, in which they heard all their warlike
deeds praised, and every wonderful action brought forward with honor.
Every verse ended with this refrain,--

"Gold and possessions will flee away,
Friends and foes must die one day;
Every man on earth must die,
But a famous name will never die."

And with that they beat upon their shields, and hammered upon the table
with knives and bones, in a most outrageous manner.

The Viking's wife sat upon a raised cross seat in the open hall. She
wore a silk dress, golden bracelets, and large amber beads. She was in
costly attire, and the bard named her in his song, and spoke of the rich
treasure of gold which she had brought to her husband. Her husband had
already seen the wonderfully beautiful child in the daytime, and was
delighted with her beauty; even her wild ways pleased him. He said the
little maiden would grow up to be a heroine, with the strong will and
determination of a man. She would never wink her eyes, even if, in joke,
an expert hand should attempt to cut off her eye-brows with a sharp
sword.

The full cask of mead soon became empty, and a fresh one was brought in;
for these were people who liked plenty to eat and drink. The old
proverb, which every one knows, says that "the cattle know when to
leave their pasture, but a foolish man knows not the measure of his own
appetite." Yes, they all knew this; but men may know what is right, and
yet often do wrong. They also knew "that even the welcome guest becomes
wearisome when he sits too long in the house." But there they remained;
for pork and mead are good things. And so at the Viking's house they
stayed, and enjoyed themselves; and at night the bondmen slept in the
ashes, and dipped their fingers in the fat, and licked them. Oh, it was
a delightful time!

Once more in the same year the Viking went forth, though the storms of
autumn had already commenced to roar. He went with his warriors to the
coast of Britain; he said that it was but an excursion of pleasure
across the water, so his wife remained at home with the little girl.
After a while, it is quite certain the foster-mother began to love the
poor frog, with its gentle eyes and its deep sighs, even better than the
little beauty who bit and fought with all around her.

The heavy, damp mists of autumn, which destroy the leaves of the wood,
had already fallen upon forest and heath. Feathers of plucked birds, as
they call the snow, flew about in thick showers, and winter was coming.
The sparrows took possession of the stork's nest, and conversed about
the absent owners in their own fashion; and they, the stork pair and all
their young ones, where were they staying now? The storks might have
been found in the land of Egypt, where the sun's rays shone forth
bright and warm, as it does here at midsummer. Tamarinds and acacias
were in full bloom all over the country, the crescent of Mahomet
glittered brightly from the cupolas of the mosques, and on the slender
pinnacles sat many of the storks, resting after their long journey.
Swarms of them took divided possession of the nests-- nests which lay
close to each other between the venerable columns, and crowded the
arches of temples in forgotten cities. The date and the palm lifted
themselves as a screen or as a sun-shade over them. The gray pyramids
looked like broken shadows in the clear air and the far-off desert,
where the ostrich wheels his rapid flight, and the lion, with his subtle
eyes, gazes at the marble sphinx which lies half buried in sand. The
waters of the Nile had retreated, and the whole bed of the river was
covered with frogs, which was a most acceptable prospect for the stork
families. The young storks thought their eyes deceived them, everything
around appeared so beautiful.

"It is always like this here, and this is how we live in our warm
country," said the stork-mamma; and the thought made the young ones
almost beside themselves with pleasure.

"Is there anything more to see?" they asked; "are we going farther
into the country?"

"There is nothing further for us to see," answered the stork-mamma.
"Beyond this delightful region there are immense forests, where the
branches of the trees entwine round each other, while prickly, creeping
plants cover the paths, and only an elephant could force a passage for
himself with his great feet. The snakes are too large, and the lizards
too lively for us to catch. Then there is the desert; if you went there,
your eyes would soon be full of sand with the lightest breeze, and if it
should blow great guns, you would most likely find yourself in a
sand-drift. Here is the best place for you, where there are frogs and
locusts; here I shall remain, and so must you." And so they stayed.

The parents sat in the nest on the slender minaret, and rested, yet
still were busily employed in cleaning and smoothing their feathers, and
in sharpening their beaks against their red stockings; then they would
stretch out their necks, salute each other, and gravely raise their
heads with the high-polished forehead, and soft, smooth feathers, while
their brown eyes shone with intelligence. The female young ones strutted
about amid the moist rushes, glancing at the other young storks and
making acquaintances, and swallowing a frog at every third step, or
tossing a little snake about with their beaks, in a way they considered
very becoming, and besides it tasted very good. The young male storks
soon began to quarrel; they struck at each other with their wings, and
pecked with their beaks till the blood came. And in this manner many of
the young ladies and gentlemen were betrothed to each other: it was, of
course, what they wanted, and indeed what they lived for. Then they
returned to a nest, and there the quarrelling began afresh; for in hot
countries people are almost all violent and passionate. But for all that
it was pleasant, especially for the old people, who watched them with
great joy: all that their young ones did suited them. Every day here
there was sunshine, plenty to eat, and nothing to think of but pleasure.
But in the rich castle of their Egyptian host, as they called him,
pleasure was not to be found. The rich and mighty lord of the castle lay
on his couch, in the midst of the great hall, with its many colored
walls looking like the centre of a great tulip; but he was stiff and
powerless in all his limbs, and lay stretched out like a mummy. His
family and servants stood round him; he was not dead, although he could
scarcely be said to live. The healing moor-flower from the north, which
was to have been found and brought to him by her who loved him so well,
had not arrived. His young and beautiful daughter who, in swan's
plumage, had flown over land and seas to the distant north, had never
returned. She is dead, so the two swan-maidens had said when they came
home; and they made up quite a story about her, and this is what they
told,--

"We three flew away together through the air," said they: "a hunter
caught sight of us, and shot at us with an arrow. The arrow struck our
young friend and sister, and slowly singing her farewell song she sank
down, a dying swan, into the forest lake. On the shores of the lake,
under a spreading birch-tree, we laid her in the cold earth. We had our
revenge; we bound fire under the wings of a swallow, who had a nest on
the thatched roof of the huntsman. The house took fire, and burst into
flames; the hunter was burnt with the house, and the light was reflected
over the sea as far as the spreading birch, beneath which we laid her
sleeping dust. She will never return to the land of Egypt." And then
they both wept. And stork-papa, who heard the story, snapped with his
beak so that it might be heard a long way off.

"Deceit and lies!" cried he; "I should like to run my beak deep into
their chests."

"And perhaps break it off," said the mamma stork, "then what a sight
you would be. Think first of yourself, and then of your family; all
others are nothing to us."

"Yes, I know," said the stork-papa; "but to-morrow I can easily place
myself on the edge of the open cupola, when the learned and wise men
assemble to consult on the state of the sick man; perhaps they may come
a little nearer to the truth." And the learned and wise men assembled
together, and talked a great deal on every point; but the stork could
make no sense out of anything they said; neither were there any good
results from their consultations, either for the sick man, or for his
daughter in the marshy heath. When we listen to what people say in this
world, we shall hear a great deal; but it is an advantage to know what
has been said and done before, when we listen to a conversation. The
stork did, and we know at least as much as he, the stork.

"Love is a life-giver. The highest love produces the highest life. Only
through love can the sick man be cured." This had been said by many,
and even the learned men acknowledged that it was a wise saying.

"What a beautiful thought!" exclaimed the papa stork immediately.

"I don't quite understand it," said the mamma stork, when her husband
repeated it; "however, it is not my fault, but the fault of the
thought; whatever it may be, I have something else to think of."

Now the learned men had spoken also of love between this one and that
one; of the difference of the love which we have for our neighbor, to
the love that exists between parents and children; of the love of the
plant for the light, and how the germ springs forth when the sunbeam
kisses the ground. All these things were so elaborately and learnedly
explained, that it was impossible for stork-papa to follow it, much less
to talk about it. His thoughts on the subject quite weighed him down; he
stood the whole of the following day on one leg, with half-shut eyes,
thinking deeply. So much learning was quite a heavy weight for him to
carry. One thing, however, the papa stork could understand. Every one,
high and low, had from their inmost hearts expressed their opinion that
it was a great misfortune for so many thousands of people-- the whole
country indeed-- to have this man so sick, with no hopes of his
recovery. And what joy and blessing it would spread around if he could
by any means be cured! But where bloomed the flower that could bring him
health? They had searched for it everywhere; in learned writings, in the
shining stars, in the weather and wind. Inquiries had been made in every
by-way that could be thought of, until at last the wise and learned men
has asserted, as we have been already told, that "love, the life-giver,
could alone give new life to a father;" and in saying this, they had
overdone it, and said more than they understood themselves. They
repeated it, and wrote it down as a recipe, "Love is a life-giver."
But how could such a recipe be prepared-- that was a difficulty they
could not overcome. At last it was decided that help could only come
from the princess herself, whose whole soul was wrapped up in her
father, especially as a plan had been adopted by her to enable her to
obtain a remedy.

More than a year had passed since the princess had set out at night,
when the light of the young moon was soon lost beneath the horizon. She
had gone to the marble sphinx in the desert, shaking the sand from her
sandals, and then passed through the long passage, which leads to the
centre of one of the great pyramids, where the mighty kings of
antiquity, surrounded with pomp and splendor, lie veiled in the form of
mummies. She had been told by the wise men, that if she laid her head on
the breast of one of them, from the head she would learn where to find
life and recovery for her father. She had performed all this, and in a
dream had learnt that she must bring home to her father the lotus
flower, which grows in the deep sea, near the moors and heath in the
Danish land. The very place and situation had been pointed out to her,
and she was told that the flower would restore her father to health and
strength. And, therefore, she had gone forth from the land of Egypt,
flying over to the open marsh and the wild moor in the plumage of a
swan.

The papa and mamma storks knew all this, and we also know it now. We
know, too, that the Marsh King has drawn her down to himself, and that
to the loved ones at home she is forever dead. One of the wisest of them
said, as the stork-mamma also said, "That in some way she would, after
all, manage to succeed;" and so at last they comforted themselves with
this hope, and would wait patiently; in fact, they could do nothing
better.

"I should like to get away the swan's feathers from those two
treacherous princesses," said the papa stork; "then, at least, they
would not be able to fly over again to the wild moor, and do more
wickedness. I can hide the two suits of feathers over yonder, till we
find some use for them."

"But where will you put them?" asked the mamma stork.

"In our nest on the moor. I and the young ones will carry them by turns
during our flight across; and as we return, should they prove too heavy
for us, we shall be sure to find plenty of places on the way in which we
can conceal them till our next journey. Certainly one suit of swan's
feathers would be enough for the princess, but two are always better. In
those northern countries no one can have too many travelling wrappers."

"No one will thank you for it," said stork-mamma; "but you are
master; and, excepting at breeding time, I have nothing to say."

In the Viking's castle on the wild moor, to which the storks directed
their flight in the following spring, the little maiden still remained.
They had named her Helga, which was rather too soft a name for a child
with a temper like hers, although her form was still beautiful. Every
month this temper showed itself in sharper outlines; and in the course
of years, while the storks still made the same journeys in autumn to the
hill, and in spring to the moors, the child grew to be almost a woman,
and before any one seemed aware of it, she was a wonderfully beautiful
maiden of sixteen. The casket was splendid, but the contents were
worthless. She was, indeed, wild and savage even in those hard,
uncultivated times. It was a pleasure to her to splash about with her
white hands in the warm blood of the horse which had been slain for
sacrifice. In one of her wild moods she bit off the head of the black
cock, which the priest was about to slay for the sacrifice. To her
foster-father she said one day, "If thine enemy were to pull down thine
house about thy ears, and thou shouldest be sleeping in unconscious
security, I would not wake thee; even if I had the power I would never
do it, for my ears still tingle with the blow that thou gavest me years
ago. I have never forgotten it." But the Viking treated her words as a
joke; he was, like every one else, bewitched with her beauty, and knew
nothing of the change in the form and temper of Helga at night. Without
a saddle, she would sit on a horse as if she were a part of it, while it
rushed along at full speed; nor would she spring from its back, even
when it quarrelled with other horses and bit them. She would often leap
from the high shore into the sea with all her clothes on, and swim to
meet the Viking, when his boat was steering home towards the shore. She
once cut off a long lock of her beautiful hair, and twisted it into a
string for her bow. "If a thing is to be done well," said she, "I
must do it myself."

The Viking's wife was, for the time in which she lived, a woman of
strong character and will; but, compared to her daughter, she was a
gentle, timid woman, and she knew that a wicked sorcerer had the
terrible child in his power. It was sometimes as if Helga acted from
sheer wickedness; for often when her mother stood on the threshold of
the door, or stepped into the yard, she would seat herself on the brink
of the well, wave her arms and legs in the air, and suddenly fall right
in. Here she was able, from her frog nature, to dip and dive about in
the water of the deep well, until at last she would climb forth like a
cat, and come back into the hall dripping with water, so that the green
leaves that were strewed on the floor were whirled round, and carried
away by the streams that flowed from her.

But there was one time of the day which placed a check upon Helga. It
was the evening twilight; when this hour arrived she became quiet and
thoughtful, and allowed herself to be advised and led; then also a
secret feeling seemed to draw her towards her mother. And as usual, when
the sun set, and the transformation took place, both in body and mind,
inwards and outwards, she would remain quiet and mournful, with her form
shrunk together in the shape of a frog. Her body was much larger than
those animals ever are, and on this account it was much more hideous in
appearance; for she looked like a wretched dwarf, with a frog's head,
and webbed fingers. Her eyes had a most piteous expression; she was
without a voice, excepting a hollow, croaking sound, like the smothered
sobs of a dreaming child.

Then the Viking's wife took her on her lap, and forgot the ugly form,
as she looked into the mournful eyes, and often said, "I could wish
that thou wouldst always remain my dumb frog child, for thou art too
terrible when thou art clothed in a form of beauty." And the Viking
woman wrote Runic characters against sorcery and spells of sickness, and
threw them over the wretched child; but they did no good.

"One can scarcely believe that she was ever small enough to lie in the
cup of the water-lily," said the papa stork; "and now she is grown up,
and the image of her Egyptian mother, especially about the eyes. Ah, we
shall never see her again; perhaps she has not discovered how to help
herself, as you and the wise men said she would. Year after year have I
flown across and across the moor, but there was no sign of her being
still alive. Yes, and I may as well tell you that you that each year,
when I arrived a few days before you to repair the nest, and put
everything in its place, I have spent a whole night flying here and
there over the marshy lake, as if I had been an owl or a bat, but all to
no purpose. The two suit of swan's plumage, which I and the young ones
dragged over here from the land of the Nile, are of no use; trouble
enough it was to us to bring them here in three journeys, and now they
are lying at the bottom of the nest; and if a fire should happen to
break out, and the wooden house be burnt down, they would be
destroyed."

"And our good nest would be destroyed, too," said the mamma stork;
"but you think less of that than of your plumage stuff and your
moor-princess. Go and stay with her in the marsh if you like. You are a
bad father to your own children, as I have told you already, when I
hatched my first brood. I only hope neither we nor our children may have
an arrow sent through our wings, owing to that wild girl. Helga does not
know in the least what she is about. We have lived in this house longer
than she has, she should think of that, and we have never forgotten our
duty. We have paid every year our toll of a feather, an egg, and a young
one, as it is only right we should do. You don't suppose I can wander
about the court-yard, or go everywhere as I used to do in old times. I
can do it in Egypt, where I can be a companion of the people, without
forgetting myself. But here I cannot go and peep into the pots and
kettles as I do there. No, I can only sit up here and feel angry with
that girl, the little wretch; and I am angry with you, too; you should
have left her lying in the water lily, then no one would have known
anything about her."

"You are far better than your conversation," said the papa stork; "I
know you better than you know yourself." And with that he gave a hop,
and flapped his wings twice, proudly; then he stretched his neck and
flew, or rather soared away, without moving his outspread wings. He went
on for some distance, and then he gave a great flap with his wings and
flew on his course at a rapid rate, his head and neck bending proudly
before him, while the sun's rays fell on his glossy plumage.

"He is the handsomest of them all," said the mamma stork, as she
watched him; "but I won't tell him so."

Early in the autumn, the Viking again returned home laden with spoil,
and bringing prisoners with him. Among them was a young Christian
priest, one of those who contemned the gods of the north. Often lately
there had been, both in hall and chamber, a talk of the new faith which
was spreading far and wide in the south, and which, through the means of
the holy Ansgarius, had already reached as far as Hedeby on the Schlei.
Even Helga had heard of this belief in the teachings of One who was
named Christ, and who for the love of mankind, and for their redemption,
had given up His life. But to her all this had, as it were, gone in one
ear and out the other. It seemed that she only understood the meaning of
the word "love," when in the form of a miserable frog she crouched
together in the corner of the sleeping chamber; but the Viking's wife
had listened to the wonderful story, and had felt herself strangely
moved by it.

On their return, after this voyage, the men spoke of the beautiful
temples built of polished stone, which had been raised for the public
worship of this holy love. Some vessels, curiously formed of massive
gold, had been brought home among the booty. There was a peculiar
fragrance about them all, for they were incense vessels, which had been
swung before the altars in the temples by the Christian priests. In the
deep stony cellars of the castle, the young Christian priest was
immured, and his hands and feet tied together with strips of bark. The
Viking's wife considered him as beautiful as Baldur, and his distress
raised her pity; but Helga said he ought to have ropes fastened to his
heels, and be tied to the tails of wild animals.

"I would let the dogs loose after him" she said; "over the moor and
across the heath. Hurrah! that would be a spectacle for the gods, and
better still to follow in its course."

But the Viking would not allow him to die such a death as that,
especially as he was the disowned and despiser of the high gods. In a
few days, he had decided to have him offered as a sacrifice on the
blood-stone in the grove. For the first time, a man was to be sacrificed
here. Helga begged to be allowed to sprinkle the assembled people with
the blood of the priest. She sharpened her glittering knife; and when
one of the great, savage dogs, who were running about the Viking's
castle in great numbers, sprang towards her, she thrust the knife into
his side, merely, as she said, to prove its sharpness.

The Viking's wife looked at the wild, badly disposed girl, with great
sorrow; and when night came on, and her daughter's beautiful form and
disposition were changed, she spoke in eloquent words to Helga of the
sorrow and deep grief that was in her heart. The ugly frog, in its
monstrous shape, stood before her, and raised its brown mournful eyes to
her face, listening to her words, and seeming to understand them with
the intelligence of a human being.

"Never once to my lord and husband has a word passed my lips of what I
have to suffer through you; my heart is full of grief about you," said
the Viking's wife. "The love of a mother is greater and more powerful
than I ever imagined. But love never entered thy heart; it is cold and
clammy, like the plants on the moor."

Then the miserable form trembled; it was as if these words had touched
an invisible bond between body and soul, for great tears stood in the
eyes.

"A bitter time will come for thee at last," continued the Viking's
wife; "and it will be terrible for me too. It had been better for thee
if thou hadst been left on the high-road, with the cold night wind to
lull thee to sleep." And the Viking's wife shed bitter tears, and went
away in anger and sorrow, passing under the partition of furs, which
hung loose over the beam and divided the hall.

The shrivelled frog still sat in the corner alone. Deep silence reigned
around. At intervals, a half-stifled sigh was heard from its inmost
soul; it was the soul of Helga. It seemed in pain, as if a new life were
arising in her heart. Then she took a step forward and listened; then
stepped again forward, and seized with her clumsy hands the heavy bar
which was laid across the door. Gently, and with much trouble, she
pushed back the bar, as silently lifted the latch, and then took up the
glimmering lamp which stood in the ante-chamber of the hall. It seemed
as if a stronger will than her own gave her strength. She removed the
iron bolt from the closed cellar-door, and slipped in to the prisoner.
He was slumbering. She touched him with her cold, moist hand, and as he
awoke and caught sight of the hideous form, he shuddered as if he beheld
a wicked apparition. She drew her knife, cut through the bonds which
confined his hands and feet, and beckoned to him to follow her. He
uttered some holy names and made the sign of the cross, while the form
remained motionless by his side.

"Who art thou?" he asked, "whose outward appearance is that of an
animal, while thou willingly performest acts of mercy?"

The frog-figure beckoned to him to follow her, and led him through a
long gallery concealed by hanging drapery to the stables, and then
pointed to a horse. He mounted upon it, and she sprang up also before
him, and held tightly by the animal's mane. The prisoner understood
her, and they rode on at a rapid trot, by a road which he would never
have found by himself, across the open heath. He forgot her ugly form,
and only thought how the mercy and loving-kindness of the Almighty was
acting through this hideous apparition. As he offered pious prayers and
sang holy songs of praise, she trembled. Was it the effect of prayer and
praise that caused this? or, was she shuddering in the cold morning air
at the thought of approaching twilight? What were her feelings? She
raised herself up, and wanted to stop the horse and spring off, but the
Christian priest held her back with all his might, and then sang a pious
song, as if this could loosen the wicked charm that had changed her into
the semblance of a frog.

And the horse galloped on more wildly than before. The sky painted
itself red, the first sunbeam pierced through the clouds, and in the
clear flood of sunlight the frog became changed. It was Helga again,
young and beautiful, but with a wicked demoniac spirit. He held now a
beautiful young woman in his arms, and he was horrified at the sight. He
stopped the horse, and sprang from its back. He imagined that some new
sorcery was at work. But Helga also leaped from the horse and stood on
the ground. The child's short garment reached only to her knee. She
snatched the sharp knife from her girdle, and rushed like lightning at
the astonished priest. "Let me get at thee!" she cried; "let me get
at thee, that I may plunge this knife into thy body. Thou art pale as
ashes, thou beardless slave." She pressed in upon him. They struggled
with each other in heavy combat, but it was as if an invisible power had
been given to the Christian in the struggle. He held her fast, and the
old oak under which they stood seemed to help him, for the loosened
roots on the ground became entangled in the maiden's feet, and held
them fast. Close by rose a bubbling spring, and he sprinkled Helga's
face and neck with the water, commanded the unclean spirit to come
forth, and pronounced upon her a Christian blessing. But the water of
faith has no power unless the well-spring of faith flows within. And yet
even here its power was shown; something more than the mere strength of
a man opposed itself, through his means, against the evil which
struggled within her. His holy action seemed to overpower her. She
dropped her arms, glanced at him with pale cheeks and looks of
amazement. He appeared to her a mighty magician skilled in secret arts;
his language was the darkest magic to her, and the movements of his
hands in the air were as the secret signs of a magician's wand. She
would not have blinked had he waved over her head a sharp knife or a
glittering axe; but she shrunk from him as he signed her with the sign
of the cross on her forehead and breast, and sat before him like a tame
bird, with her head bowed down. Then he spoke to her, in gentle words,
of the deed of love she had performed for him during the night, when she
had come to him in the form of an ugly frog, to loosen his bonds, and to
lead him forth to life and light; and he told her that she was bound in
closer fetters than he had been, and that she could recover also life
and light by his means. He would take her to Hedeby to St. Ansgarius,
and there, in that Christian town, the spell of the sorcerer would be
removed. But he would not let her sit before him on the horse, though of
her own free will she wished to do so. "Thou must sit behind me, not
before me," said he. "Thy magic beauty has a magic power which comes
from an evil origin, and I fear it; still I am sure to overcome through
my faith in Christ." Then he knelt down, and prayed with pious fervor.
It was as if the quiet woodland were a holy church consecrated by his
worship. The birds sang as if they were also of this new congregation;
and the fragrance of the wild flowers was as the ambrosial perfume of
incense; while, above all, sounded the words of Scripture, "A light to
them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide their
feet into the way of peace." And he spoke these words with the deep
longing of his whole nature.

Meanwhile, the horse that had carried them in wild career stood quietly
by, plucking at the tall bramble-bushes, till the ripe young berries
fell down upon Helga's hands, as if inviting her to eat. Patiently she
allowed herself to be lifted on the horse, and sat there like a
somnambulist-- as one who walked in his sleep. The Christian bound two
branches together with bark, in the form of a cross, and held it on high
as they rode through the forest. The way gradually grew thicker of
brushwood, as they rode along, till at last it became a trackless
wilderness. Bushes of the wild sloe here and there blocked up the path,
so that they had to ride over them. The bubbling spring formed not a
stream, but a marsh, round which also they were obliged to guide the
horse; still there were strength and refreshment in the cool forest
breeze, and no trifling power in the gentle words spoken in faith and
Christian love by the young priest, whose inmost heart yearned to lead
this poor lost one into the way of light and life. It is said that
rain-drops can make a hollow in the hardest stone, and the waves of the
sea can smooth and round the rough edges of the rocks; so did the dew of
mercy fall upon Helga, softening what was hard, and smoothing what was
rough in her character. These effects did not yet appear; she was not
herself aware of them; neither does the seed in the lap of earth know,
when the refreshing dew and the warm sunbeams fall upon it, that it
contains within itself power by which it will flourish and bloom. The
song of the mother sinks into the heart of the child, and the little one
prattles the words after her, without understanding their meaning; but
after a time the thoughts expand, and what has been heard in childhood
seems to the mind clear and bright. So now the "Word," which is
all-powerful to create, was working in the heart of Helga.

They rode forth from the thick forest, crossed the heath, and again
entered a pathless wood. Here, towards evening, they met with robbers.

"Where hast thou stolen that beauteous maiden?" cried the robbers,
seizing the horse by the bridle, and dragging the two riders from its
back.

The priest had nothing to defend himself with, but the knife he had
taken from Helga, and with this he struck out right and left. One of the
robbers raised his axe against him; but the young priest sprang on one
side, and avoided the blow, which fell with great force on the horse's
neck, so that the blood gushed forth, and the animal sunk to the ground.
Then Helga seemed suddenly to awake from her long, deep reverie; she
threw herself hastily upon the dying animal. The priest placed himself
before her, to defend and shelter her; but one of the robbers swung his
iron axe against the Christian's head with such force that it was
dashed to pieces, the blood and brains were scattered about, and he fell
dead upon the ground. Then the robbers seized beautiful Helga by her
white arms and slender waist; but at that moment the sun went down, and
as its last ray disappeared, she was changed into the form of a frog. A
greenish white mouth spread half over her face; her arms became thin and
slimy; while broad hands, with webbed fingers, spread themselves out
like fans. Then the robbers, in terror, let her go, and she stood among
them, a hideous monster; and as is the nature of frogs to do, she hopped
up as high as her own size, and disappeared in the thicket. Then the
robbers knew that this must be the work of an evil spirit or some secret
sorcery, and, in a terrible fright, they ran hastily from the spot.

The full moon had already risen, and was shining in all her radiant
splendor over the earth, when from the thicket, in the form of a frog,
crept poor Helga. She stood still by the corpse of the Christian priest,
and the carcase of the dead horse. She looked at them with eyes that
seemed to weep, and from the frog's head came forth a croaking sound,
as when a child bursts into tears. She threw herself first upon one, and
then upon the other; brought water in her hand, which, from being
webbed, was large and hollow, and poured it over them; but they were
dead, and dead they would remain. She understood that at last. Soon wild
animals would come and tear their dead bodies; but no, that must not
happen. Then she dug up the earth, as deep as she was able, that she
might prepare a grave for them. She had nothing but a branch of a tree
and her two hands, between the fingers of which the webbed skin
stretched, and they were torn by the work, while the blood ran down her
hands. She saw at last that her work would be useless, more than she
could accomplish; so she fetched more water, and washed the face of the
dead, and then covered it with fresh green leaves; she also brought
large boughs and spread over him, and scattered dried leaves between the
branches. Then she brought the heaviest stones that she could carry, and
laid them over the dead body, filling up the crevices with moss, till
she thought she had fenced in his resting-place strongly enough. The
difficult task had employed her the whole night; and as the sun broke
forth, there stood the beautiful Helga in all her loveliness, with her
bleeding hands, and, for the first time, with tears on her maiden
cheeks. It was, in this transformation, as if two natures were striving
together within her; her whole frame trembled, and she looked around her
as if she had just awoke from a painful dream. She leaned for support
against the trunk of a slender tree, and at last climbed to the topmost
branches, like a cat, and seated herself firmly upon them. She remained
there the whole day, sitting alone, like a frightened squirrel, in the
silent solitude of the wood, where the rest and stillness is as the calm
of death.

Butterflies fluttered around her, and close by were several ant-hills,
each with its hundreds of busy little creatures moving quickly to and
fro. In the air, danced myriads of gnats, swarm upon swarm, troops of
buzzing flies, ladybirds, dragon-flies with golden wings, and other
little winged creatures. The worm crawled forth from the moist ground,
and the moles crept out; but, excepting these, all around had the
stillness of death: but when people say this, they do not quite
understand themselves what they mean. None noticed Helga but a flock of
magpies, which flew chattering round the top of the tree on which she
sat. These birds hopped close to her on the branches with bold
curiosity. A glance from her eyes was a signal to frighten them away,
and they were not clever enough to find out who she was; indeed she
hardly knew herself.

When the sun was near setting, and the evening's twilight about to
commence, the approaching transformation aroused her to fresh exertion.
She let herself down gently from the tree, and, as the last sunbeam
vanished, she stood again in the wrinkled form of a frog, with the torn,
webbed skin on her hands, but her eyes now gleamed with more radiant
beauty than they had ever possessed in her most beautiful form of
loveliness; they were now pure, mild maidenly eyes that shone forth in
the face of a frog. They showed the existence of deep feeling and a
human heart, and the beauteous eyes overflowed with tears, weeping
precious drops that lightened the heart.

On the raised mound which she had made as a grave for the dead priest,
she found the cross made of the branches of a tree, the last work of him
who now lay dead and cold beneath it. A sudden thought came to Helga,
and she lifted up the cross and planted it upon the grave, between the
stones that covered him and the dead horse. The sad recollection brought
the tears to her eyes, and in this gentle spirit she traced the same
sign in the sand round the grave; and as she formed, with both her
hands, the sign of the cross, the web skin fell from them like a torn
glove. She washed her hands in the water of the spring, and gazed with
astonishment at their delicate whiteness. Again she made the holy sign
in the air, between herself and the dead man; her lips trembled, her
tongue moved, and the name which she in her ride through the forest had
so often heard spoken, rose to her lips, and she uttered the words,
"Jesus Christ." Then the frog skin fell from her; she was once more a
lovely maiden. Her head bent wearily, her tired limbs required rest, and
then she slept.

Her sleep, however, was short. Towards midnight, she awoke; before her
stood the dead horse, prancing and full of life, which shone forth from
his eyes and from his wounded neck. Close by his side appeared the
murdered Christian priest, more beautiful than Baldur, as the Viking's
wife had said; but now he came as if in a flame of fire. Such gravity,
such stern justice, such a piercing glance shone from his large, gentle
eyes, that it seemed to penetrate into every corner of her heart.
Beautiful Helga trembled at the look, and her memory returned with a
power as if it had been the day of judgment. Every good deed that had
been done for her, every loving word that had been said, were vividly
before her mind. She understood now that love had kept her here during
the day of her trial; while the creature formed of dust and clay, soul
and spirit, had wrestled and struggled with evil. She acknowledged that
she had only followed the impulses of an evil disposition, that she had
done nothing to cure herself; everything had been given her, and all had
happened as it were by the ordination of Providence. She bowed herself
humbly, confessed her great imperfections in the sight of Him who can
read every fault of the heart, and then the priest spoke. "Daughter of
the moorland, thou hast come from the swamp and the marshy earth, but
from this thou shalt arise. The sunlight shining into thy inmost soul
proves the origin from which thou hast really sprung, and has restored
the body to its natural form. I am come to thee from the land of the
dead, and thou also must pass through the valley to reach the holy
mountains where mercy and perfection dwell. I cannot lead thee to Hedeby
that thou mayst receive Christian baptism, for first thou must remove
the thick veil with which the waters of the moorland are shrouded, and
bring forth from its depths the living author of thy being and thy life.
Till this is done, thou canst not receive consecration."

Then he lifted her on the horse and gave her a golden censer, similar to
those she had already seen at the Viking's house. A sweet perfume arose
from it, while the open wound in the forehead of the slain priest, shone
with the rays of a diamond. He took the cross from the grave, and held
it aloft, and now they rode through the air over the rustling trees,
over the hills where warriors lay buried each by his dead war-horse; and
the brazen monumental figures rose up and galloped forth, and stationed
themselves on the summits of the hills. The golden crescent on their
foreheads, fastened with golden knots, glittered in the moonlight, and
their mantles floated in the wind. The dragon, that guards buried
treasure, lifted his head and gazed after them. The goblins and the
satyrs peeped out from beneath the hills, and flitted to and fro in the
fields, waving blue, red, and green torches, like the glowing sparks in
burning paper. Over woodland and heath, flood and fen, they flew on,
till they reached the wild moor, over which they hovered in broad
circles. The Christian priest held the cross aloft, and it glittered
like gold, while from his lips sounded pious prayers. Beautiful Helga's
voice joined with his in the hymns he sung, as a child joins in her
mother's song. She swung the censer, and a wonderful fragrance of
incense arose from it; so powerful, that the reeds and rushes of the
moor burst forth into blossom. Each germ came forth from the deep
ground: all that had life raised itself. Blooming water-lilies spread
themselves forth like a carpet of wrought flowers, and upon them lay a
slumbering woman, young and beautiful. Helga fancied that it was her own
image she saw reflected in the still water. But it was her mother she
beheld, the wife of the Marsh King, the princess from the land of the
Nile.

The dead Christian priest desired that the sleeping woman should be
lifted on the horse, but the horse sank beneath the load, as if he had
been a funeral pall fluttering in the wind. But the sign of the cross
made the airy phantom strong, and then the three rode away from the
marsh to firm ground.

At the same moment the cock crew in the Viking's castle, and the dream
figures dissolved and floated away in the air, but mother and daughter
stood opposite to each other.

"Am I looking at my own image in the deep water?" said the mother.

"Is it myself that I see represented on a white shield?" cried the
daughter.

Then they came nearer to each other in a fond embrace. The mother's
heart beat quickly, and she understood the quickened pulses. "My
child!" she exclaimed, "the flower of my heart-- my lotus flower of
the deep water!" and she embraced her child again and wept, and the
tears were as a baptism of new life and love for Helga. "In swan's
plumage I came here," said the mother, "and here I threw off my
feather dress. Then I sank down through the wavering ground, deep into
the marsh beneath, which closed like a wall around me; I found myself
after a while in fresher water; still a power drew me down deeper and
deeper. I felt the weight of sleep upon my eyelids. Then I slept, and
dreams hovered round me. It seemed to me as if I were again in the
pyramids of Egypt, and yet the waving elder trunk that had frightened me
on the moor stood ever before me. I observed the clefts and wrinkles in
the stem; they shone forth in strange colors, and took the form of
hieroglyphics. It was the mummy case on which I gazed. At last it burst,
and forth stepped the thousand years' old king, the mummy form, black
as pitch, black as the shining wood-snail, or the slimy mud of the
swamp. Whether it was really the mummy or the Marsh King I know not. He
seized me in his arms, and I felt as if I must die. When I recovered
myself, I found in my bosom a little bird, flapping its wings,
twittering and fluttering. The bird flew away from my bosom, upwards
towards the dark, heavy canopy above me, but a long, green band kept it
fastened to me. I heard and understood the tenor of its longings.
Freedom! sunlight! to my father! Then I thought of my father, and the
sunny land of my birth, my life, and my love. Then I loosened the band,
and let the bird fly away to its home-- to a father. Since that hour I
have ceased to dream; my sleep has been long and heavy, till in this
very hour, harmony and fragrance awoke me, and set me free."

The green band which fastened the wings of the bird to the mother's
heart, where did it flutter now? whither had it been wafted? The stork
only had seen it. The band was the green stalk, the cup of the flower
the cradle in which lay the child, that now in blooming beauty had been
folded to the mother's heart.

And while the two were resting in each other's arms, the old stork flew
round and round them in narrowing circles, till at length he flew away
swiftly to his nest, and fetched away the two suits of swan's feathers,
which he had preserved there for many years. Then he returned to the
mother and daughter, and threw the swan's plumage over them; the
feathers immediately closed around them, and they rose up from the earth
in the form of two white swans.

"And now we can converse with pleasure," said the stork-papa; "we can
understand one another, although the beaks of birds are so different in
shape. It is very fortunate that you came to-night. To-morrow we should
have been gone. The mother, myself and the little ones, we're about to
fly to the south. Look at me now: I am an old friend from the Nile, and
a mother's heart contains more than her beak. She always said that the
princess would know how to help herself. I and the young ones carried
the swan's feathers over here, and I am glad of it now, and how lucky
it is that I am here still. When the day dawns we shall start with a
great company of other storks. We'll fly first, and you can follow in
our track, so that you cannot miss your way. I and the young ones will
have an eye upon you."

"And the lotus-flower which I was to take with me," said the Egyptian
princess, "is flying here by my side, clothed in swan's feathers. The
flower of my heart will travel with me; and so the riddle is solved. Now
for home! now for home!"

But Helga said she could not leave the Danish land without once more
seeing her foster-mother, the loving wife of the Viking. Each pleasing
recollection, each kind word, every tear from the heart which her
foster-mother had wept for her, rose in her mind, and at that moment she
felt as if she loved this mother the best.

"Yes, we must go to the Viking's castle," said the stork; "mother
and the young ones are waiting for me there. How they will open their
eyes and flap their wings! My wife, you see, does not say much; she is
short and abrupt in her manner; but she means well, for all that. I will
flap my wings at once, that they may hear us coming." Then stork-papa
flapped his wings in first-rate style, and he and the swans flew away to
the Viking's castle.

In the castle, every one was in a deep sleep. It had been late in the
evening before the Viking's wife retired to rest. She was anxious about
Helga, who, three days before, had vanished with the Christian priest.
Helga must have helped him in his flight, for it was her horse that was
missed from the stable; but by what power had all this been
accomplished? The Viking's wife thought of it with wonder, thought on
the miracles which they said could be performed by those who believed in
the Christian faith, and followed its teachings. These passing thoughts
formed themselves into a vivid dream, and it seemed to her that she was
still lying awake on her couch, while without darkness reigned. A storm
arose; she heard the lake dashing and rolling from east and west, like
the waves of the North Sea or the Cattegat. The monstrous snake which,
it is said, surrounds the earth in the depths of the ocean, was
trembling in spasmodic convulsions. The night of the fall of the gods
was come, "Ragnorock," as the heathens call the judgment-day, when
everything shall pass away, even the high gods themselves. The war
trumpet sounded; riding upon the rainbow, came the gods, clad in steel,
to fight their last battle on the last battle-field. Before them flew
the winged vampires, and the dead warriors closed up the train. The
whole firmament was ablaze with the northern lights, and yet the
darkness triumphed. It was a terrible hour. And, close to the terrified
woman, Helga seemed to be seated on the floor, in the hideous form of a
frog, yet trembling, and clinging to her foster-mother, who took her on
her lap, and lovingly caressed her, hideous and frog-like as she was.
The air was filled with the clashing of arms and the hissing of arrows,
as if a storm of hail was descending upon the earth. It seemed to her
the hour when earth and sky would burst asunder, and all things be
swallowed up in Saturn's fiery lake; but she knew that a new heaven and
a new earth would arise, and that corn-fields would wave where now the
lake rolled over desolate sands, and the ineffable God reign. Then she
saw rising from the region of the dead, Baldur the gentle, the loving,
and as the Viking's wife gazed upon him, she recognized his
countenance. It was the captive Christian priest. "White Christian!"
she exclaimed aloud, and with the words, she pressed a kiss on the
forehead of the hideous frog-child. Then the frog-skin fell off, and
Helga stood before her in all her beauty, more lovely and
gentle-looking, and with eyes beaming with love. She kissed the hands of
her foster-mother, blessed her for all her fostering love and care
during the days of her trial and misery, for the thoughts she had
suggested and awoke in her heart, and for naming the Name which she now
repeated. Then beautiful Helga rose as a mighty swan, and spread her
wings with the rushing sound of troops of birds of passage flying
through the air.

Then the Viking's wife awoke, but she still heard the rushing sound
without. She knew it was the time for the storks to depart, and that it
must be their wings which she heard. She felt she should like to see
them once more, and bid them farewell. She rose from her couch, stepped
out on the threshold, and beheld, on the ridge of the roof, a party of
storks ranged side by side. Troops of the birds were flying in circles
over the castle and the highest trees; but just before her, as she stood
on the threshold and close to the well where Helga had so often sat and
alarmed her with her wildness, now stood two swans, gazing at her with
intelligent eyes. Then she remembered her dream, which still appeared to
her as a reality. She thought of Helga in the form of a swan. She
thought of a Christian priest, and suddenly a wonderful joy arose in her
heart. The swans flapped their wings and arched their necks as if to
offer her a greeting, and the Viking's wife spread out her arms towards
them, as if she accepted it, and smiled through her tears. She was
roused from deep thought by a rustling of wings and snapping of beaks;
all the storks arose, and started on their journey towards the south.

"We will not wait for the swans," said the mamma stork; "if they want
to go with us, let them come now; we can't sit here till the plovers
start. It is a fine thing after all to travel in families, not like the
finches and the partridges. There the male and the female birds fly in
separate flocks, which, to speak candidly, I consider very unbecoming."

"What are those swans flapping their wings for?"

"Well, every one flies in his own fashion," said the papa stork. "The
swans fly in an oblique line; the cranes, in the form of a triangle; and
the plovers, in a curved line like a snake."

"Don't talk about snakes while we are flying up here," said
stork-mamma. "It puts ideas into the children's heads that can not be
realized."

"Are those the high mountains I have heard spoken of?" asked Helga, in
the swan's plumage.

"They are storm-clouds driving along beneath us," replied her mother.

"What are yonder white clouds that rise so high?" again inquired
Helga.

"Those are mountains covered with perpetual snows, that you see
yonder," said her mother. And then they flew across the Alps towards
the blue Mediterranean.

"Africa's land! Egyptia's strand!" sang the daughter of the Nile, in
her swan's plumage, as from the upper air she caught sight of her
native land, a narrow, golden, wavy strip on the shores of the Nile; the
other birds espied it also and hastened their flight.

"I can smell the Nile mud and the wet frogs," said the stork-mamma,
"and I begin to feel quite hungry. Yes, now you shall taste something
nice, and you will see the marabout bird, and the ibis, and the crane.
They all belong to our family, but they are not nearly so handsome as we
are. They give themselves great airs, especially the ibis. The Egyptians
have spoilt him. They make a mummy of him, and stuff him with spices. I
would rather be stuffed with live frogs, and so would you, and so you
shall. Better have something in your inside while you are alive, than to
be made a parade of after you are dead. That is my opinion, and I am
always right."

"The storks are come," was said in the great house on the banks of the
Nile, where the lord lay in the hall on his downy cushions, covered with
a leopard skin, scarcely alive, yet not dead, waiting and hoping for the
lotus-flower from the deep moorland in the far north. Relatives and
servants were standing by his couch, when the two beautiful swans who
had come with the storks flew into the hall. They threw off their soft
white plumage, and two lovely female forms approached the pale, sick old
man, and threw back their long hair, and when Helga bent over her
grandfather, redness came back to his cheeks, his eyes brightened, and
life returned to his benumbed limbs. The old man rose up with health and
energy renewed; daughter and grandchild welcomed him as joyfully as if
with a morning greeting after a long and troubled dream.

Joy reigned through the whole house, as well as in the stork's nest;
although there the chief cause was really the good food, especially the
quantities of frogs, which seemed to spring out of the ground in swarms.

Then the learned men hastened to note down, in flying characters, the
story of the two princesses, and spoke of the arrival of the
health-giving flower as a mighty event, which had been a blessing to the
house and the land. Meanwhile, the stork-papa told the story to his
family in his own way; but not till they had eaten and were satisfied;
otherwise they would have had something else to do than to listen to
stories.

"Well," said the stork-mamma, when she had heard it, "you will be
made something of at last; I suppose they can do nothing less."

"What could I be made?" said stork-papa; "what have I done?-- just
nothing."

"You have done more than all the rest," she replied. "But for you and
the youngsters the two young princesses would never have seen Egypt
again, and the recovery of the old man would not have been effected. You
will become something. They must certainly give you a doctor's hood,
and our young ones will inherit it, and their children after them, and
so on. You already look like an Egyptian doctor, at least in my eyes."

"I cannot quite remember the words I heard when I listened on the
roof," said stork-papa, while relating the story to his family; "all I
know is, that what the wise men said was so complicated and so learned,
that they received not only rank, but presents; even the head cook at
the great house was honored with a mark of distinction, most likely for
the soup."

"And what did you receive?" said the stork-mamma. "They certainly
ought not to forget the most important person in the affair, as you
really are. The learned men have done nothing at all but use their
tongues. Surely they will not overlook you."

Late in the night, while the gentle sleep of peace rested on the now
happy house, there was still one watcher. It was not stork-papa, who,
although he stood on guard on one leg, could sleep soundly. Helga alone
was awake. She leaned over the balcony, gazing at the sparkling stars
that shone clearer and brighter in the pure air than they had done in
the north, and yet they were the same stars. She thought of the
Viking's wife in the wild moorland, of the gentle eyes of her
foster-mother, and of the tears she had shed over the poor frog-child
that now lived in splendor and starry beauty by the waters of the Nile,
with air balmy and sweet as spring. She thought of the love that dwelt
in the breast of the heathen woman, love that had been shown to a
wretched creature, hateful as a human being, and hideous when in the
form of an animal. She looked at the glittering stars, and thought of
the radiance that had shone forth on the forehead of the dead man, as
she had fled with him over the woodland and moor. Tones were awakened in
her memory; words which she had heard him speak as they rode onward,
when she was carried, wondering and trembling, through the air; words
from the great Fountain of love, the highest love that embraces all the
human race. What had not been won and achieved by this love?

Day and night beautiful Helga was absorbed in the contemplation of the
great amount of her happiness, and lost herself in the contemplation,
like a child who turns hurriedly from the giver to examine the beautiful
gifts. She was over-powered with her good fortune, which seemed always
increasing, and therefore what might it become in the future? Had she
not been brought by a wonderful miracle to all this joy and happiness?
And in these thoughts she indulged, until at last she thought no more of
the Giver. It was the over-abundance of youthful spirits unfolding its
wings for a daring flight. Her eyes sparkled with energy, when suddenly
arose a loud noise in the court below, and the daring thought vanished.
She looked down, and saw two large ostriches running round quickly in
narrow circles; she had never seen these creatures before,-- great,
coarse, clumsy-looking birds with curious wings that looked as if they
had been clipped, and the birds themselves had the appearance of having
been roughly used. She inquired about them, and for the first time heard
the legend which the Egyptians relate respecting the ostrich.

Once, say they, the ostriches were a beautiful and glorious race of
birds, with large, strong wings. One evening the other large birds of
the forest said to the ostrich, "Brother, shall we fly to the river
to-morrow morning to drink, God willing?" and the ostrich answered, "I
will."

With the break of day, therefore, they commenced their flight; first
rising high in the air, towards the sun, which is the eye of God; still
higher and higher the ostrich flew, far above the other birds, proudly
approaching the light, trusting in its own strength, and thinking not of
the Giver, or saying, "if God will." When suddenly the avenging angel
drew back the veil from the flaming ocean of sunlight, and in a moment
the wings of the proud bird were scorched and shrivelled, and they sunk
miserably to the earth. Since that time the ostrich and his race have
never been able to rise in the air; they can only fly terror-stricken
along the ground, or run round and round in narrow circles. It is a
warning to mankind, that in all our thoughts and schemes, and in every
action we undertake, we should say, "if God will."

Then Helga bowed her head thoughtfully and seriously, and looked at the
circling ostrich, as with timid fear and simple pleasure it glanced at
its own great shadow on the sunlit walls. And the story of the ostrich
sunk deeply into the heart and mind of Helga: a life of happiness, both
in the present and in the future, seemed secure for her, and what was
yet to come might be the best of all, God willing.

Early in the spring, when the storks were again about to journey
northward, beautiful Helga took off her golden bracelets, scratched her
name on them, and beckoned to the stork-father. He came to her, and she
placed the golden circlet round his neck, and begged him to deliver it
safely to the Viking's wife, so that she might know that her
foster-daughter still lived, was happy, and had not forgotten her.

"It is rather heavy to carry," thought stork-papa, when he had it on
his neck; "but gold and honor are not to be flung into the street. The
stork brings good fortune-- they'll be obliged to acknowledge that at
last."

"You lay gold, and I lay eggs," said stork-mamma; "with you it is
only once in a way, I lay eggs every year But no one appreciates what we
do; I call it very mortifying."

"But then we have a consciousness of our own worth, mother," replied
stork-papa.

"What good will that do you?" retorted stork-mamma; "it will neither
bring you a fair wind, nor a good meal."

"The little nightingale, who is singing yonder in the tamarind grove,
will soon be going north, too." Helga said she had often heard her
singing on the wild moor, so she determined to send a message by her.
While flying in the swan's plumage she had learnt the bird language;
she had often conversed with the stork and the swallow, and she knew
that the nightingale would understand. So she begged the nightingale to
fly to the beechwood, on the peninsula of Jutland, where a mound of
stone and twigs had been raised to form the grave, and she begged the
nightingale to persuade all the other little birds to build their nests
round the place, so that evermore should resound over that grave music
and song. And the nightingale flew away, and time flew away also.

In the autumn, an eagle, standing upon a pyramid, saw a stately train of
richly laden camels, and men attired in armor on foaming Arabian steeds,
whose glossy skins shone like silver, their nostrils were pink, and
their thick, flowing manes hung almost to their slender legs. A royal
prince of Arabia, handsome as a prince should be, and accompanied by
distinguished guests, was on his way to the stately house, on the roof
of which the storks' empty nests might be seen. They were away now in
the far north, but expected to return very soon. And, indeed, they
returned on a day that was rich in joy and gladness.

A marriage was being celebrated, in which the beautiful Helga,
glittering in silk and jewels, was the bride, and the bridegroom the
young Arab prince. Bride and bridegroom sat at the upper end of the
table, between the bride's mother and grandfather. But her gaze was not
on the bridegroom, with his manly, sunburnt face, round which curled a
black beard, and whose dark fiery eyes were fixed upon her; but away
from him, at a twinkling star, that shone down upon her from the sky.
Then was heard the sound of rushing wings beating the air. The storks
were coming home; and the old stork pair, although tired with the
journey and requiring rest, did not fail to fly down at once to the
balustrades of the verandah, for they knew already what feast was being
celebrated. They had heard of it on the borders of the land, and also
that Helga had caused their figures to be represented on the walls, for
they belonged to her history.

"I call that very sensible and pretty," said stork-papa.

"Yes, but it is very little," said mamma stork; "they could not
possibly have done less."

But, when Helga saw them, she rose and went out into the verandah to
stroke the backs of the storks. The old stork pair bowed their heads,
and curved their necks, and even the youngest among the young ones felt
honored by this reception.

Helga continued to gaze upon the glittering star, which seemed to glow
brighter and purer in its light; then between herself and the star
floated a form, purer than the air, and visible through it. It floated
quite near to her, and she saw that it was the dead Christian priest,
who also was coming to her wedding feast-- coming from the heavenly
kingdom.

"The glory and brightness, yonder, outshines all that is known on
earth," said he.

Then Helga the fair prayed more gently, and more earnestly, than she had
ever prayed in her life before, that she might be permitted to gaze, if
only for a single moment, at the glory and brightness of the heavenly
kingdom. Then she felt herself lifted up, as it were, above the earth,
through a sea of sound and thought; not only around her, but within her,
was there light and song, such as words cannot express.

"Now we must return;" he said; "you will be missed."

"Only one more look," she begged; "but one short moment more."

"We must return to earth; the guests will have all departed. Only one
more look!-- the last!"

Then Helga stood again in the verandah. But the marriage lamps in the
festive hall had been all extinguished, and the torches outside had
vanished. The storks were gone; not a guest could be seen; no
bridegroom-- all in those few short moments seemed to have died. Then a
great dread fell upon her. She stepped from the verandah through the
empty hall into the next chamber, where slept strange warriors. She
opened a side door, which once led into her own apartment, but now, as
she passed through, she found herself suddenly in a garden which she had
never before seen here, the sky blushed red, it was the dawn of morning.
Three minutes only in heaven, and a whole night on earth had passed
away! Then she saw the storks, and called to them in their own language.

Then stork-papa turned his head towards here, listened to her words, and
drew near. "You speak our language," said he, "what do you wish? Why
do you appear,-- you-- a strange woman?"

"It is I-- it is Helga! Dost thou not know me? Three minutes ago we
were speaking together yonder in the verandah."

"That is a mistake," said the stork, "you must have dreamed all
this."

"No, no," she exclaimed. Then she reminded him of the Viking's
castle, of the great lake, and of the journey across the ocean.

Then stork-papa winked his eyes, and said, "Why that's an old story
which happened in the time of my grandfather. There certainly was a
princess of that kind here in Egypt once, who came from the Danish land,
but she vanished on the evening of her wedding day, many hundred years
ago, and never came back. You may read about it yourself yonder, on a
monument in the garden. There you will find swans and storks sculptured,
and on the top is a figure of the princess Helga, in marble."

And so it was; Helga understood it all now, and sank on her knees. The
sun burst forth in all its glory, and, as in olden times, the form of
the frog vanished in his beams, and the beautiful form stood forth in
all its loveliness; so now, bathed in light, rose a beautiful form,
purer, clearer than air-- a ray of brightness-- from the Source of light
Himself. The body crumbled into dust, and a faded lotus-flower lay on
the spot on which Helga had stood.

"Now that is a new ending to the story," said stork-papa; "I really
never expected it would end in this way, but it seems a very good
ending."

"And what will the young ones say to it, I wonder?" said stork-mamma.

"Ah, that is a very important question," replied the stork.
