# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_gardener_and_the_noble_family
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The gardener and the noble family 

About four miles from the city stood an old manor house with thick
walls, towers, and pointed gables. Here lived, but only in the summer
season, a rich and noble family. Of all the different estates they
owned, this was the best and the most beautiful; on the outside it
looked as if it had just been cast in a foundry, and the inside was made
for comfort and ease. The family coat of arms was carved in stone over
the gate; beautiful roses climbed about the arms and the balconies; the
courtyard was covered with grass; there were red thorn and white thorn,
and many rare flowers even outside the greenhouse.

The owners of the manor house also had a very skillful gardener. It was
a pleasure to see the flower garden, the orchard, and the vegetable
garden. A part of the manor's original old garden was still there,
consisting of a few box-tree hedges cut so that they formed crowns and
pyramids. Behind these stood two old, mighty trees, almost always
without leaves, and one might easily think that a storm or a waterspout
had scattered great lumps of dirt on their branches, but each lump was a
bird's nest. Here, from time immemorial, a screaming swarm of crows and
rooks had built their nests; it was a regular bird town, and the birds
were the owners, the manor's oldest family - the real lordship! The
people below meant nothing to them; they tolerated these crawling
creatures, even if every now and then they shot with their guns, making
the birds' backbones shiver, so that every bird flew up in fear and
cried, "Rak! Rak!"

The gardener often spoke to the noble family about cutting down the old
trees; they did not look well, and by taking them away they might also
get rid of the shrieking birds, which then would probably look for
another place. But the family did not want to give up either the trees
or the swarm of birds; that was something the manor could not lose,
something from the olden times, which should never be forgotten.

"Why, those trees are the birds' heritage by this time, so let them
keep them, my good Larsen!" Larsen was the gardener's name, but that
is of very little consequence to this story.

"Haven't you space enough to work in, little Larsen? Have you not the
flower garden, the greenhouse, the orchard, and the vegetable garden?"

Yes, those he had, and he cared for them; he kept them in order and
cultivated them with affection and ability, and that the noble family
knew; but they did not conceal from him that they often saw flowers and
tasted fruits in other people's homes that surpassed what they had in
their garden, and that made the gardener sad, for he always wished to do
his best and really did his best. He was goodhearted and a good and
faithful worker.

One day the noble family sent for him and told him, very kindly, that
the day before, at some distinguished friend's home, they had eaten
apples and pears that were so juicy and so well flavored that they and
all the other guests had expressed their admiration. It was doubtful if
the fruits were native, but they ought to be imported and grown here,
provided the climate would permit it. It was known that they had been
bought from the finest fruit dealer in the city, and it was decided that
the gardener was to go there and find out where these apples and pears
came from and then order some slips for grafting. The gardener knew the
fruit dealer well, because he was the very person to whom he sold the
superfluous fruit that grew in the manor garden.

And the gardener went to town and asked the dealer where he got those
highly praised apples and pears. "Why, they are from your own garden,"
said the fruit dealer, and showed him both the apples and pears, which
he recognized immediately.

How happy the gardener felt! He hurried back to the family and told them
that both the apples and the pears were from their own garden. That they
couldn't believe! "That's not possible, Larsen! Can you get a written
guarantee to that effect from the fruit dealer?"

Yes, that he could, and a written guarantee he brought.

"That certainly is remarkable!" said the noble family.

Now every day great dishes filled with wonderful apples and pears from
their own garden were set on the table. Bushels and barrels of these
fruits were sent to friends in the city and outside the city; yes, even
to foreign lands. This afforded great pleasure; yet the family added
that the last two summers had, of course, been remarkably good for tree
fruits and these had done very well all over the country.

Some time passed. The family were dinner guests at court. The next day
they sent for the gardener. At the royal table they had eaten melons,
very juicy and wonderfully flavored, from their majesties' greenhouse.

"You must go to the court gardener, my good Larsen, and let him give
you some seeds of those precious melons."

"But the court gardener got his melon seeds from us!" said the
gardener, very pleased.

"Then that man knows how to bring the fruit to a higher perfection!"
answered the family. "Each melon was splendid."

"Well, then, I really can feel proud!" said the gardener. "I must
tell your lordship that the court gardener had had bad luck with his
melons this year, and when he saw how beautiful ours looked, and then
tasted them, he ordered three of them for the castle."

"Larsen, don't try to tell us that those were melons from our
garden."

"I really believe so," said the gardener.

And he went to the court gardener, from whom he got a written guarantee
to the effect that the melons on the royal table were from the manor.
This was really a big surprise to the family, and they did not keep the
story to themselves; the written guarantee was displayed, and melon
seeds were sent far and wide, as grafting slips had been earlier.

These slips, the family learned, had taken and begun to bear fruit of an
excellent kind. This was named after the family manor, and the name
became known in English, German, and French. This, no one had expected.
"Let's hope the gardener won't get big ideas about himself," said
the family.

But he took it in a different way; he would strive now to be known as
one of the best gardeners in the country and to produce something
superior out of all sorts of garden stuff every year. And that he did.
But often he was told that the very first fruits he brought out, the
apples and the pears, were, after all, the best, that all later
variations were very inferior to these. The melons were very good, to be
sure, though, of course, they belonged to another species; his
strawberries might be called delicious, but no better than those grown
by other gardeners, and when one year his radishes did not turn out very
well, they spoke only of the unsuccessful radishes and not about all the
other fine products he had developed.

It almost seemed as if the family felt a relief in saying, "It didn't
go well this year, little Larsen!" Yes, they seemed quite happy when
they said, "It didn't go well this year!"

Twice a week the gardener brought fresh flowers up to their drawing
room, always arranged with such taste and artistry that the colors
seemed to appear even brighter.

"You have good taste, Larsen," said the noble family, "but that is a
gift from our Lord, not from yourself!"

One day the gardener brought a large crystal bowl; in it floated a
water-lily leaf upon which was laid a beautiful blue flower as big as a
sunflower.

"The lotus of Hindustan!" exclaimed the family.

They had never seen a lotus flower before. In the daytime it was placed
in the sunlight and in the evening under artificial light. Everyone who
saw it found it remarkably beautiful and unusual; yes, even the most
highborn young lady in the country, the wise and kindhearted Princess,
said so. The family considered it an honor to present her with the
flower, and the Princess took it with her to the castle. Then they went
down to their garden to pick another flower of the same kind, but none
was to be found. So they sent for the gardener and asked him where he
got the blue lotus flower.

"We have been looking for it in vain," they said. "We have been in
the greenhouses and round about the flower garden!"

"Oh, no, it's not there," said the gardener. "It is only a common
flower from the vegetable garden; but, look, isn't it beautiful! It
looks like a blue cactus, and yet it is only the flower of the
artichoke!"

"You should have told us that immediately!" said the noble family.
"Naturally, we supposed it was a rare, foreign flower. You have
ridiculed us to the young Princess! She saw the flower in our house and
thought it was beautiful; she didn't know the flower, although she
knows her botany well, but then, of course, that science has nothing to
do with kitchen herbs. How could you do it, Larsen! To place such a
flower in our drawing room is enough to make us ridiculous!"

And the gorgeous blue flower from the vegetable garden was taken out of
the drawing room, where it didn't belong; yes, and the noble family
apologized to the Princess and told her that the flower was only a
kitchen herb that the Gardener had had the idea of exhibiting, and that
he had been severely reprimanded for it.

"That was a shame, and very unfair," said the Princess. "He has
really opened our eyes to a magnificent flower we otherwise would have
paid no attention to; he has shown us beauty where we didn't expect to
find it. As long as the artichoke is in bloom, our court gardener shall
daily bring one of them up to my private room!"

And this was done.

The noble family told the gardener that he could again bring them a
fresh artichoke flower.

"It is really beautiful!" they said. "Highly remarkable!" And the
gardener was praised.

"Larsen likes that," said the noble family. "He is like a spoiled
child."

In the autumn there was a terrific storm. During the night it increased
so violently that many of the large trees in the outskirts of the wood
were torn up by the roots, and to the great grief of the noble family -
yes, they called it grief - but to the gardener's delight, the two big
trees with all the birds' nests blew down. Through the storm one could
hear the screaming of the crows and the rooks as they beat their wings
against the manor windows.

"Now, of course, you are happy, Larsen!" said the noble family. "The
storm has felled the trees, and the birds have gone off into the forest.
There is nothing from olden times left to see here; every sign and
reference has disappeared; it makes us very sad!"

The gardener said nothing, but he thought of what he had long had in his
mind, how he could make use of that wonderful, sunny spot, now at his
disposal; it could become the pride of the garden and the joy of the
family.

The large trees, in falling, had crushed the very old box-tree hedges
with all their fancy trimmings. Here he put in a multitude of plants,
native plants from the fields and the woods. What no other gardener had
ever thought of planting in a manor garden, he planted, giving each its
appropriate soil, and sunlight or shadow, according to what the
individual plant required. He gave them loving care, and everything grew
magnificently.

The juniper tree from the heaths of Jutland rose in shape and color like
the Italian cypress; the shiny, thorny Christ's-thorn, ever green, in
the cold of winter and the sun of summer, was beautiful to behold. In
the foreground grew ferns of various species; some of them looked as if
they were children of the palm tree, others as if they were parents of
the pretty plant we call Venus's-hair. Here stood the neglected
burdock, so pretty in its freshness that it can be outstanding in a
bouquet. The burdock stood in a dry place, but further down, in the
moist soil, grew the coltsfoot, also a neglected plant and yet very
picturesque with its enormous leaf and its tall stem. Six-feet tall,
with flower after flower, like an enormous, many-armed candelabra, rose
the mullein, just a mere field plant. Here grew the woodruff, the
primrose, and the lily of the valley, the wild calla and the fine
three-leaved wood sorrel. It was all wonderful to see.

In the front, in rows, grew very tiny pear trees from French soil,
fastened to steel wires; by getting plenty of sun and good care they
soon bore fruit as large and juicy as in their own country. In place of
the two old leafless trees was set a tall flagpole from which
Dannebrog - the flag of Denmark - proudly flew; and close by stood
another pole, around which the hop tendril twisted and wound its
fragrant flower cones in the summer and at harvesttime, but on which in
the winter, according to an old custom, oat sheaves were hung, so that
the birds could have a good meal during the happy Christmastime.

"Our good Larsen is getting sentimental in his old age," said the
family, "but he is true and faithful to us!"

At New Year's, one of the city illustrated papers published a picture
of the old manor; it showed the flagpole and the oat sheaves for the
birds at the happy Christmastime, and the paper commented that it was a
beautiful thought to uphold and honor this old custom, so appropriate to
the old manor.

"Anything that Larsen does," said the noble family, "they beat the
drum for. He is a lucky man. We should almost be proud to have him!"

But they were not a bit proud of it; they knew they were the masters of
the manor, and they could dismiss Larsen, but that they wouldn't do.
They were good people, and there are many good people of their kind in
the world - and that is fortunate for all the Larsens.

Yes, that is the story of the gardener and the noble family. Now you may
think about it!
