# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/heartache
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Heartache 

The story we have for you here is really divided into two parts. The
first part could be omitted, but it gives us some preliminary
information which is useful.

We were staying at a manor house in the country, and it happened that
the owner was absent for a day or so. Meanwhile a lady with a pug dog
arrived from the next town; come, she explained, to dispose of the
shares in her tannery. She had her certificates with her, and we advised
her to seal them in an envelope and to write on it the address of the
proprietor of the estate, "General War Commissary, Knight," etc.

She listened to us, took up the pen, then hesitated, and begged us to
repeat the address slowly. We complied and she wrote, but in the middle
of the "General War--" she stopped, sighed, and said, "I'm only a
woman!" While she wrote, she had placed her Puggie on the floor, and he
was growling, for the dog had come with her for pleasure and health's
sake, and a visitor shouldn't be placed on the floor. He was
characterized outwardly by a snub nose and a fleshy back.

"He doesn't bite," said the woman. "He hasn't any teeth. He's like
one of the family, faithful and grouchy; but the latter is the fault of
my grandchildren for teasing him. They play wedding, and want to make
him the bridesmaid, and that's too strenuous for the poor old fellow."

Then she delivered her certificates and took Puggie up in her arms. And
that's the first part of the story, which could have been omitted.

Puggie died! That's the second part.

About a week later we arrived in the town and put up at the inn. Our
windows looked out into the tannery yard, which was divided into two
parts by a wooden fence; in one section were hides and skin caps, raw
and tanned. Here was all the equipment for carrying on a tanning
business, and it belonged to the widow. Puggie had died that morning and
was to be buried in this section of the yard. The widow's grandchildren
(that is, the tanner's widow's, for Puggie had never married) covered
the grave-a grave so beautiful it must have been quite pleasant to lie
there.

The grave was bordered with broken flowerpots and strewn over with sand;
at its head they had stuck up a small beer bottle with the neck upward,
and that wasn't at all symbolic.

The children danced around the grave, and then the oldest of the boys, a
practical youngster of seven, proposed that there should be an
exhibition of Puggie's grave for everybody living in the street. The
price of admission would be one trouser button; that was something every
boy would be sure to have and which he also could give to the little
girls. This suggestion was adopted by acclamation.

And all the children from the street, and even from the little lane
behind, came, and each gave a button. Many were seen that afternoon
going about with one suspender, but then they had seen Puggie's grave,
and that sight was worth it.

But outside the tannery yard, close to the entrance, stood a ragged
little girl, very beautiful, with the prettiest curly hair, and eyes so
clear and blue that it was a pleasure to look into them. She didn't say
a word, nor did she cry, but every time the gate was opened she looked
into the yard as long as she could. She had no button, as she knew very
well, so she had to stand sorrowfully outside, until all the others had
seen the grave and everyone had left. Then she sat down, put her little
brown hands before her eyes, and burst into tears, for she alone hadn't
seen Puggie's grave. It was a heartache as great as any grown-up can
experience.

We saw this from above-and seen from above, this, like many of our own
and others' griefs could, made us smile! That's the story, and anyone
who doesn't understand it can go and buy a share in the widow's
tannery.
