# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/chicken_grethes_family
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Chicken Grethe's family 

Chicken Grethe was the only human tenant of the fine new house that was
built for the hens and ducks on the estate. It was built where the old
baronial castle had stood with its tower, crow's-perch gable, moat, and
drawbridge. Close by was a complete wilderness of trees and bushes. This
had been the garden, running down to a big lake which was now a marsh.
Rooks, crows, and jackdaws - a whole horde of screeching, cawing birds,
hovered over the trees. The flock did not seem to diminish but rather to
increase when one fired among them. They could be heard even inside the
poultry house where Chicken Grethe sat with the ducklings waddling about
her wooden shoes. She knew each chicken and every duck from the moment
it hatched. She took pride in her chickens and her ducks, and in the
fine house that had been built for them.

Her little room was clean and tidy. Her mistress, who owned the chicken
house, insisted upon neatness, for she frequently brought distinguished
visitors to see "the barracks of her hens and ducks," as she called
the place.

She had a rocking chair, and a wardrobe, and even a chest of drawers, on
which stood a highly polished brass plate with the name "Grubbe"
engraved on it. This was the name of the old noble family that had lived
there in the days when the castle was standing. The brass plate had been
found while they were digging the ground and the parish clerk said that
it had no value except as a relic. The clerk knew all about the place
and the old days, for he was a scholar and his table drawer was filled
with manuscripts. He knew much about the old days, but perhaps the
oldest crow knew more and jabbered it out in his own language, but that
was crow-talk, which the clerk did not understand, learned though he
was.

Toward the end of hot summer day, the mist would rise over the marsh
until it looked as if there were a lake beyond the old trees where the
rooks, crows, and jackdaws lived. This was how it had looked when old
Sir Grubbe had lived there, and the castle with its massive red walls
was still standing. In those days the dog's chain used to reach clear
across the gateway. By way of the tower one came to the stone-flagged
passage that led to the living quarters. The windows were narrow and the
panes quite small, even in the great hall where they used to dance. But,
in the days of the last Grubbes, there had been no dancing for as far
back as a man could remember, though an old kettledrum that had been
used in the orchestra still remained in the hall. And there was also a
curiously carved cupboard in which the rare flower bulbs were stored,
for Lady Grubbe took pleasure in planting and in cultivating flowers and
trees. Her husband preferred to hunt wild boars and wolves, and his
little daughter, Marie, always rode with him. When she was no more than
five years old, she sat proudly on horseback and gazed fearlessly about
with her great dark eyes. She delighted in cracking her whip among the
hounds, though her father would rather have seen her lash out among the
peasant boys who came to stare at the gentry.

The peasant who lived in a clay hut near the castle had a son named
Sören, who was of the same age as the well-born little lady. He knew how
to climb trees, and he had to bring bird nests down to her. The birds
screamed as loud as they could scream, and one of the largest of them
struck him so hard right above his eye that blood ran down, and they
thought at first that he had lost and eye, but it had not been injured.
Marie Grubbe called him "her Sören," a sign of high favor which once
served to protect even his father, poor Jon. When he had done something
wrong one day, Jon was condemned to ride the wooden horse. This
contrivance stood in the yard, with four poles for legs, and for its
back a single small rail which Jon had to straddle. Lest he ride it too
comfortably, heavy bricks were tied to his feet. He made such agonized
faces that little Sören wept and went down on his knees to beg. Marie to
have his father released. She instantly commanded that his father should
be taken down. When she was not obeyed, Marie stamped her small feet on
the flagstones and tugged at her father's coat sleeve until she tore
it. She would have her way, and she got it. Sören's father was
released.

Lady Grubbe came to her, stroked her hair, and looked at her daughter
with mild, approving eyes. But Marie did not understand why. She would
go with the hounds, not with her mother, who went down through the
garden to the lake, where the water lilies bloomed, and where the
bulrushes swayed among the reeds. "How charming," Lady Grubbe would
say, as she admired this fresh, abundant growth. A then very rare tree,
which she herself had planted, grew in her garden. A blood beech it was
called, a sort of dark Moor among the other trees, so dark brown were
its leaves. It needed plenty of sunlight, for in constant shade its
leaves would turn green like those of other trees, and thus lose their
distinction. In her tall chestnut trees, in the shrubbery, and even the
grass were many bird nests. The birds seemed to understand that they
were safe here, where no one dared fire a gun.

But little Marie came here with Sören who, as we know, could climb, and
she sent him to bring her down both the eggs and the downy little birds.
The parent birds fluttered about in terror and anguish. Large and
small - lapwings from the lawns, rooks, crows, and jackdaws, from the
tall trees - they screamed and shrieked just as their progeny shriek
today.

"Children, what are you doing?" the gentlewoman cried. "What a wicked
thing to do."

Sören looked ashamed and even the high-born young girl looked a little
embarrassed, but then she said in an abrupt and sulky way: "My father
lets me do this."

"Away, away!" the black birds shrieked, and away they flew, but they
came back the next day because they lived there.

But the quiet gentlewoman did not live there much longer. The Lord
called her away, and with Him she was more at home than ever she was in
this house. The church bells solemnly tolled as her body was carried to
the church, and poor men's eyes grew dim, for she had shown them
kindness. And now that she was gone no one looked after her plants, so
the garden went to rack and ruin.

"Sir Grubbe is a hard man," people would say, "but young as she is
his daughter can handle him." He would laugh and let her have her will.
She was twelve years old now, tall and well built. She looked right
through people with her great dark eyes, rode her horse like a man, and
shot her gun like an experienced hunter.

It came to pass that great men visited that district. They were as great
as great can be - the young King with his half-brother and crony, Lord
Ulrick Frederick Gyldenlöve. They came to hunt wild boar, and they
planned to stay overnight at Sir Grubbe's castle.

At the table, when Gyldenlöve sat beside Marie, he took her about the
neck and gave her a kiss, just as if they had been related. But she gave
him a slap in the face, and told him she could not stand him. This
caused great laughter, as if it were a most pleasing sight.

And maybe it was, because five years later, when Marie was seventeen,
Gyldenlöve sent a messenger with a letter asking for her hand in
marriage. That was something!

"He is the highest and most gallant lord in the land," said Sir
Grubbe. "You cannot refuse him."

"I don't like him much," Marie Grubbe said, but she did not turn down
the highest lord in the land, who sat next to the King.

Her silver, woolens, and linens were sent by ship to Copenhagen. Marie
made the trip overland in ten days, but the ship with the dowry met with
contrary winds, or no wind at all. It took four months to reach
Copenhagen, and when it did get there Lady Gyldenlöve had gone.

"I'd sooner lie on sacks than in his silken bed," she said. "I'd
sooner walk barefoot than ride in a carriage with him."

Late on an evening in November, two women came riding into the town of
Aarhus. They were Lady Gyldenlöve and her maid. They came from Veile,
where they had arrived by ship from Copenhagen. They rode up to Sir
Grubbe's town house. He was not at all pleased to see Marie. He gave
her harsh words, but he did give her a bedroom. She got her beer broth
for breakfast, but no good words to go with it. Her father's bad temper
had turned against her, and she was not used to it. Her own temper was
by no means mild. As one is spoken to, so one answers, and answer she
did. Of her husband she spoke with bitterness and hatred. She declared
that she could not live with him; she was too honorable and virtuous for
that.

In this fashion a year went by, most unpleasantly. Bitter words passed
between father and daughter. That should not be. Bitter words bear
bitter fruit. What would be the outcome?

One day her father said, "We cannot live under the same roof. You must
move to our old castle. I would rather you bit off your tongue than
spoke lies."

So they parted. With her maid, she went to the old estate where she was
born and bred, and where her mother, that pious gentlewoman, lay in the
churchyard vault.

An old cowherd lived in the castle, and that was all. Cobwebs, heavy and
black with dirt, draped every room. The garden was not taken care of.
Wild hops and other climbing vines wove a tangled web between trees and
shrubbery. Hemlock and nettles grew tall and rank. The blood beech had
been outgrown, and in the deep shade its leaves had turned as green as
those of ordinary trees. Its glory was gone.

Rooks, crows, and jackdaws flew in enormous flocks above the tall
chestnuts. They shrieked and cawed as if they had great news to tell
each other. Here she was again, the girl who ordered their eggs and
babies to be stolen from their nests. The real thief, the one who had
actually stolen them, was now climbing a leafless tree. He clung to the
tall ship's mast, and got his share of lashes with a rope's end if he
didn't behave himself.

All this was told in our own time by the parish clerk. He had pieced it
together from books and letters, and it lay with many another manuscript
hidden away in his table drawer. "Up and down is the way the world
goes," said he. "It's a curious story to hear." We want to hear how
it went with Marie Grubbe, but we shall not lose track of Chicken Grethe
who sat there in her fine hen house, in our own day. Marie Grubbe sat in
this place in her day, but not so contentedly as old Chicken Grethe.

Winter went by. Spring and summer passed, and again came the stormy
autumn with its cold and wet fog. It was a dull and dreary life there on
the old estate. Marie Grubbe would snatch up her gun and go out on the
heath to shoot hares or foxes, and whatever birds she could find. More
than once on these excursions she encountered a nobleman, Sir Palle Dyre
from Nörrebaek with his gun and his dogs. He was a big man, who enjoyed
boasting of his strength when he talked with her. He might have been a
match for the departed Mr. Brockenhus of Egeskov, at Fyen, whom people
still remember as a man of might. Like him, Palle Dyre had fastened a
hunting horn to an iron chain over his gateway. When he came home he
would catch hold of the chain, lift himself and his horse clear off the
ground, and sound the horn.

"You must come to my castle and see that, Lady Marie," he said, "for
we have fine fresh air at Nörrebaek." We have no record of when she
went to Nörrebaek, but on the candlesticks at Nörrebaek church it is
inscribed that they were given by Palle Dyre and Marie Grubbe of
Nörrebaek Castle. Body and strength had Palle Dyre. He could drink like
a sponge. He was like a cask that could never be filled. He snored
enough for a whole pig pen, and he looked red and bloated.

"A cunning swine and a nagging fool he is," said Lady Palle Dyre, the
daughter of Grubbe. She soon grew weary of the life there, which did not
improve matters. At dinner time one day, the food got cold on the table.
Palle Dyre was off fox-hunting, and Lady Dyre could not be found. Palle
Dyre came home at midnight. Lady Dyre came home neither by midnight nor
by morning. She turned her back upon Nörrebaek, and rode away without a
word of farewell. The weather was cloudy and wet. The wind was sharp,
and the flock of black birds that croaked over her head were not as
homeless as she.

First she rode south, almost to Germany. She turned a couple of gold
rings with precious stones into ready money. She went east and she went
west, with no fixed goal. She was angry with everybody and even with the
good Lord himself, so sick was her mind. And soon her body was sick too.
She could scarcely drag her feet along. The lapwing flew up from its
tuft of grass when she stumbled upon it and fell. The bird screamed, as
it always does, "You thief, you thief!" Yet she had never stolen her
neighbors' goods, except for the birds' eggs and nestlings taken from
the clumps of grass and the tall trees when she was a little girl. She
thought of that now.

From where she lay, she could see the sand dunes along the beach.
Fishermen lived there, but she was too ill to crawl so far. The great
white sea gulls came screaming over her as the rooks, crows, and
jackdaws screamed above the trees at home. The birds flew nearer and
nearer, until at last she thought they were black birds. But then
everything went black before her eyes.

When she opened her eyes again she was being carried in the arms of a
tall, strapping fellow. She looked straight into his bearded face, and
saw that he had a scar over one eye that appeared to divide the eyebrow
in two. Sick as she was, he carried her to his ship, where he was abused
by the shipmaster for bringing such a burden.

The ship set sail next day. Marie Grubbe sailed with it - she was not
put ashore. Didn't she ever come back? Yes, but when and how?

The parish clerk could tell about this too. It was not a tale which he
had pieced together. He had the whole strange story from a reliable book
which we can get and read for ourselves.

The Danish author, Ludvig Holberg, who has written so many books worth
reading and so many gay comedies by which we get to know his time and
its people, mentions Marie Grubbe in his letters, which tell how and in
what part of the world he found her. This is well worth hearing, but we
shall not lose track of Chicken Grethe, who sits so happy and
comfortable in her imposing chicken house.

The ship sailed off with Marie Grubbe. That was where we left off. Year
upon year went by.

The plague was raging in Copenhagen. That was in the year of 1711. The
Queen of Denmark went to her German home. The King left his capital, and
every one who could made haste to leave. The students, even those who
had free board and lodging, scurried out of the city. One of them, the
last student left at what they called Borch's College, near the
students' headquarters, made ready to go. At two o'clock in the
morning he started out, with his knapsack stuffed with more books and
manuscripts than clothes. A raw, dank mist hung over the city. Not a
soul was to be seen in the street through which he passed. All around
him the gates and doors were marked with the crosses which showed that
there people lay ill or had died of the plague. Even in broad and
winding Meatmonger's street - as the street leading from the round
tower to the King's palace was called then - there was not a man to be
seen. Suddenly a large hearse came rumbling by. The driver cracked his
whip to urge his horses into a gallop, for the wagon was crammed with to
urge his horses into a gallop, for the wagon was crammed with corpses.
The young student covered his face with his hands, and breathed the
fumes of strong spirits which he carried in a brass- boxed sponge.

From a grog shop in one of the streets came the sound of songs and
forced laughter. Men were drinking the night away in an effort to forget
that Death stood at their door, beckoning to them to come with him and
join the other dead men in the hearse. The student hurried on to Castle
Bridge, where two small boats were moored. One of them was just about to
cast off and quit the plague-ridden city.

"If the Lord spares out lives and the wind serves us, we shall sail to
Grönsund, on Falster," the captain said, and he asked the name of this
student who wanted to go with them.

"Ludvig Holberg," the student said, and at that time it sounded like
any other name. Now it resounds as one of Denmark's proudest names, but
he was then only a young student, and unknown.

The boat slipped past the castle, and before daybreak they came to the
open sea. A light breeze sprang up and the sails filled. The student sat
down with the wind in his face, and fell asleep. And that wasn't
exactly an advisable thing to do! On the third morning the boat was
already at Falster.

"Do you know of anyone in this place with whom I can live cheaply?"
Holberg asked the captain.

"I believe you had best go to the ferry man's wife at Borrehouse," he
said. "If you want to be polite, call her Mother Sören Sörensen Möller,
but she may turn angry if you show her too much politeness. Her husband
is under arrest for some crime or other, and she runs the ferry herself.
What fists she has!"

The student shouldered his knapsack and went to the ferry house. The
door was not locked, so he lifted the latch and entered a brick-floored
room in which a large folding bed with a big furred cover was the most
noticeable piece of furniture. A white hen, with her chickens around
her, was tied to the bedstead. She had upset her drinking dish, and
water ran across the floor. No one was there or in the next room, except
a little child who lay in a cradle.

The ferry boat came back with only one person on board - whether man or
woman was hard to say. This person was wrapped in a great cloak, with a
hood that covered the head.

When the boat was docked, it was a woman who entered the room. She had
an impressive air as she straightened up and looked at him. Two proud
eyes were set under her dark brows. It was Mother Sören, the ferry
man's wife, though rooks, crows, and jackdaws could scream out another
name by which we would know her better.

Glum she looked, and little enough she cared for talk, but it was
settled that the student would stay and board with her for an
undetermined time, until things went well again in Copenhagen.

Now and then some honest fellows from the neighboring town dropped in at
the ferry house. Among them were Frank, the cutler, and Sivert, the
customs collector, who came to drink a mug of ale and to chat with the
student. He was a thoughtful young man who knew what's what, as they
said. He read Latin and Greek, and was well posted in many fields of
knowledge.

"The less one knows, the lighter his burden," said Mother Sören.

One day when Holberg watched her wash clothes in strong lye, and chop up
knotty stumps for firewood, he told her:

"You work too hard."

"That's my business," she said.

"Have you had to toil and slave this way ever since you were a child?"

"Read the answer in my hands," she said, and showed him her two hands,
small but strong and hard, with broken nails. "You know how to read.
Read them."

At Christmas time there was a heavy snowfall. The cold made itself at
home, and the winds blew as bitterly as if they were dashing acid in
people's faces. Mother Sören didn't care. She flung on her cloak, drew
up the hood, and went about her business. When the house grew dark early
in the afternoon, she would throw pine knots on the fire and sit by it
to darn her stockings, for she had no one to do it for her. As evening
came on she talked with the student more than she usually did. she spoke
of her husband:

"By accident he killed a captain from Dragor, and for this they put him
in chains and sentenced him to three years of hard labor on the King's
Island. He is only an ordinary sailor, so the law must take its course,
you know."

"The law applies to the upper classes too," Holberg said.

"Do you believe that?" Mother Sören stared into the fire, and then
went on. "Do you know the story of Kay Lykke, who ordered one of his
churches torn down? When Mads, the pastor, thundered from the pulpit
against this, he had Mads clapped in irons and thrown in prison. Then he
appointed himself Judge, found Mads guilty, condemned him, and had his
head struck off. That was no accident, yet Kay Lykke was never
punished."

"He was within his right, according to the custom of his time,"
Holberg said. "We have come a long way since then."

"Try to make fools believe you." Mother Sören got up and went into the
next room where Toesen, her little child, lay in the cradle. When she
had tidied and aired the cradle, she made the student's bed. He had the
big furred cover, for though he was born in Norway he felt the cold more
than she did.

New Year's Day dawned clear and sunny. It was so cold that the
snowdrifts were hard enough for one to walk across them. The bells in
the village were ringing for church, as student Holberg wrapped himself
in his heavy cloak to set off for town. Rooks flew screeching over
Börrehouse, and so did the crows and jackdaws. They made such a racket
that you could scarcely hear the bells. Mother Sören stood outside,
filling a brass kettle with snow, to melt over the fire for drinking
water. She gazed up at the dark swarm of birds and thought her own
thoughts.

Student Holberg went to church and on his way back he passed the house
of Sivert, the customs collector. Sivert invited him in to warm himself
from a bowl of mulled ale, sweetened with syrup and ginger. They started
to talk about Mother Sören, but the customs collector knew little about
her. Indeed, there were few who did. "She is not a native of Falster,"
he said, "and she has probably seen better days. Her husband is a
common sailor, with a violent temper. He killed a captain on Dragör,
and, though he used to beat his wife, she always sticks up for him."

"I would never stand for that," said the customs collector's wife.
"I too come of better stock. My father wove stockings for the King."

"So naturally you married one of the King's officers," Holberg said,
with a bow to her husband.

Twelfth Night came, and Mother Sören lighted for Holberg a candle of the
Three Kings - that is, three small tallow candles - which she herself
had prepared.

"A candle for each man!" said Holberg.

"Each man?" she exclaimed, and looked at him hard.

"Each of the wise men from the east," Holberg said.

"Oh, that's how you meant it," she said, and sat in silence for a
while. But on that evening of the Three Kings, he learned a great deal
about her that he had not known.

"You are fond of the man you are wedded to," Holberg said, "yet
people tell me he daily mistreated you."

"That concerns no one but me," Mother Sören declared. "The blows
would have done me good had they fallen when I was a child. Now they
probably fall for my sins. I only know the good he has done me." She
stood up straight. "When I lay ill and weak among the sand dunes, and
no one would come near me except perhaps the rooks, the crows, and the
jackdaws, who came to pick at me, he carried me in his arms, and got
hard words for bringing such a find on board his ship. I do not come of
sickly stock, so I recovered. All of us have our faults, and Sören has
his. One must not judge the horse by his halter. With him I have led a
more pleasant life than I did with him whom they called the highest and
most gallant one of all the King's men. I have been married to Governor
Gyldenlöve, half-brother to the King. Afterward I took Palle Dyre. Good
or bad, each has his own way, and I have mine. That was a long story,
and now you know it."

Mother Sören went out of the room.

So this was Marie Grubbe, so strangely does the ball of fortune turn.
She did not live to see many more feasts of the Three Kings. Holberg
wrote that she died in June, 1716, but he did not write, for he did not
know, that when Mother Sören, as they called her, lay dead in
Borrehouse, a flock of large black birds flew over the roof in silence.
They did not scream, and it was as if they knew that at funerals one
must be quiet. As soon as she was in her grave, the birds departed, but
on that same evening the birds were seen in enormous numbers over her
old estate in Jutland. Rooks, crows, and jackdaws, screamed to each
other as if they had much to tell. Perhaps they croaked of him who
robbed them of their eggs and young ones when he was a boy - the peasant
boy who received an iron garter on the King's Island - and also of the
high-born young lady who died a ferry woman at Grönsund.

"Bra! Bra!" they croaked. And "Bra, Bra!" the whole tribe croaked
when the old castle was torn down. "And this they cry still, though
there is nothing left to croak about," said the parish clerk, when he
told the story. "The family died out, the castle was torn down, and
where it stood the new hen house now stands, with its gilded weathercock
on the roof, and Chicken Grethe inside. There she sits, well satisfied
with her cosy residence, for if she had not come here she would have
gone to the workhouse!" - The pigeons cooed above her, the turkeys
clucked, and the ducks quacked around her. "No one knew her," they
said. "She had no relatives. By an act of charity she came here, and
children she had none!"

Nevertheless, she had ancestors, though she did not know of them, nor
did the parish clerk, for all the manuscripts he had in his table
drawer. But one of the old crows knew, and he told about it. From its
mother and its grandmother, it had heard tell of Chicken Grethe's
mother and grandmother, whom we know too. We know how, as a child, she
rode over the drawbridge and looked about proudly, as if the whole world
and all the bird nests in it belonged to her. We also saw her on the
sand dunes, and last at the ferry house. Her granddaughter, last of her
line, had come home again where the old castle had stood, and where the
wild birds croaked. But she sat among her tame fowls, known by them and
on friendly terms with them.

Chicken Grethe had nothing more to wish for. She was happy to die and
old enough to die.

"Grave, grave!" the crows croaked.

And Chicken Grethe was buried in a good grave. No one knows where it
lies except the old crow, if he isn't dead too.

Now we know the story of the old castle, and of all Chicken Grethe's
family.
