# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_jewish_girl
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The Jewish girl 

Among the other children in the charity school was a little Jewish girl,
clever and good-in fact, the brightest of them all. But there was one
class she could not attend, the one where religion was taught, for she
was in a Christian school.

During the hour of this class, she had her geography book before her to
study, or did her arithmetic, but the lessons were quickly learned, and
then, though the book might still be open before her, she did not read
from it; she listened. And the teacher soon noticed that she listened
more intently than any of the rest.

"Study your book," said the teacher, gently yet earnestly. But she
looked back at him with her black, eager eyes, and when he put his
questions to her as well as the rest he found she knew more than all the
others. She had listened, understood, and kept his words.

Her father was a poor but honest man, and when he first brought her to
the school he had given instructions that she should not be taught the
Christian faith. But to send her from the room during the Scripture
lesson might have given offense and raised various thoughts in the minds
of the other children in the class, and so she remained. But this could
not go on any longer.

So the teacher went to her father and explained that he must either take
his daughter away from the school or consent to her becoming a
Christian.

"I cannot bear to see those burning eyes, that sincere yearning thirst
of the soul, so to speak, after the words of the Gospel," he said.

Then her father burst into tears. "I know very little myself of our own
faith," he replied, "but her mother was a daughter of Israel, strong
and steadfast in her faith, and on her deathbed I promised her that our
child should never receive Christian baptism. That promise I must keep,
for to me it is like a pact with God."

So the little Jewish girl was taken away from the Christian school.

Years had passed.

In a humble household, in one of the smallest provincial towns of
Jutland there was a maidservant, a poor girl of the Jewish faith; this
was Sarah. Her hair was as black as ebony, and her eyes were dark yet
full of brilliant light, such eyes as you see among the daughters of the
East. And the expression in the face of the grown-up girl was still that
of the child who sat on the schoolroom bench, listening with eager and
wistful eyes.

Every Sunday the sound of the organ and the singing of the congregation
sounded from the church, and the tones floated across the street and
into the house where the Jewish girl attended diligently and faithfully
to her work. "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy," was her law;
but her Sabbath was a day of labor to Christians, and only in her heart
could she keep it holy. And that she believed was not enough.

But then the thought came to her soul, "What do days and hours matter
in the sight of God?" and on the Sunday of the Christians she had her
own undisturbed hour of devotion. Then if the sound of the organ and the
singing came across to her as she stood behind the sink in the kitchen,
even this became a quiet and consecrated spot. Then she would read the
treasure and property of her own people, the Old Testament, and that
alone; for she kept deep in her heart what her father had told the
teacher and herself when she was taken from the school-the promise he
had made to her dying mother, "that Sarah should not be baptized, nor
forsake the faith of her fathers." The New Testament was, and would
forever remain, a sealed book to her; and yet she knew much of it, for
it shone through the memories of her childhood.

One evening she was sitting in a corner of the living room while her
master read aloud. She allowed herself to listen, for this was not the
Gospel; no, he was reading from an old storybook, so she could remain.
The master read to them of a Hungarian knight who was taken captive by a
Turkish pasha and yoked with oxen to the plow. He was driven with lashes
of the whip and suffered pain and thirst almost beyond endurance.

But at home his wife sold her jewels and mortgaged their castle and
lands, while friends contributed large sums to help raise the almost
unbelievable amount of money that was demanded as ransom. This finally
was collected, and he was delivered from slavery and disgrace. Sick and
suffering, he returned home.

But soon there resounded over the countryside the summons to a crusade
against the foe of Christianity. The sick man heard the call and could
have neither peace nor rest any longer; they had to lift him on his war
horse. Then the blood rushed again to his cheeks, his strength seemed to
return, and he rode forth to victory. The very pasha who had made him
suffer pain and humiliation yoked to the plow became his captive. He was
taken home to the castle dungeon, but before he had been there an hour
the knight came to him and asked his prisoner, "What do you think now
awaits you?"

"I know," replied the Turk. "Retribution."

"Yes, the retribution of a Christian," said the knight. "The
teachings of Christ tell us to forgive our enemies and love our fellow
men. God is love! Go in peace to your home and loved ones, and be gentle
and good to all who suffer."

Then the prisoner burst into tears. "How could I have believed such a
thing possible?" he cried. "I was certain I would have to suffer shame
and torture, hence I took poison, and within a few hours I shall die.
There is no remedy. But before I die, teach me the faith which is so
full of such love and mercy; it is great and divine! In that faith let
me die; let me die a Christian!" And his request was granted him.

That was the legend, the story that was read to them. All listened to it
with close attention, but it sank deepest into the heart of her who sat
in the corner, the servantmaid, Sarah, the Jewess. Large tears stood in
her sparkling coal-black eyes while she sat there, as years ago on the
school bench, and felt the greatness of the Gospel. The tears rolled
down her cheeks.

"Let not my child become a Christian!" Her mother's dying words rang
through her soul with those of the law, "Honor thy father and thy
mother!"

"Still I have not been baptized! They call me 'the Jewess'; the boys
of the neighborhood mocked me last Sunday as I stood outside the church
door and looked in at the burning altar lights and the singing
congregation. Ever since my school days, up to this very hour, the power
of Christianity, which is like a sunbeam, and which, no matter how much
I close my eyes, penetrates into my heart. But, my mother, I will not
bring you sorrow in your grave! I will not betray the promise my father
made to you; I will not read the Christian's Bible! Have I not the God
of my fathers? On Him let me rest my head!"

And the years rolled by.

The husband died, and the wife was left in difficult circumstances. The
servant girl had to be dismissed, but Sarah would not leave the widow.
She became her help in time of trouble and kept the little household
together; she worked late every night, and by the labor of her own hands
got bread for the house. There were no close relatives to help a family
where the widow grew weaker each day, lingering for months on a sickbed.
Gentle and good Sarah watched and nursed and labored and was the
blessing of the poverty-stricken home.

"There is the Bible," said the sick woman one evening. "Read a little
to me; the evening is so long, and I sadly need to hear the word of
God."

Sarah bowed her head, picked up the Bible and folded her hands around
it, opened it, and read aloud to the sick woman. Often the tears came
into her eyes, but they shone more clearly, and the darkness lifted from
her soul. "Mother, your child shall not receive the baptism of the
Christians, shall not be named in their communion. You have wished it,
and I shall honor your wish. In this we are united here on earth, but
above this is-is a greater union in God. He leads and guides us beyond
Death. 'I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground.' Oh, I understand now! I do not know myself how I came to
it! Through Him it was-in Him-Christ!"

And she trembled as she spoke the holy name; a baptism of fire streamed
through her, stronger than her feeble frame could bear, and she sank
down, more exhausted even than the sick woman whom she nursed.

"Poor Sarah!" people said. "She is worn out with labor and nursing!"

They took her to the charity hospital, and there she died, and thence
she was carried to her grave. It was not to the graveyard of the
Christians-that was not the place for a Jewish girl; no, outside by the
wall they dug a grave for her.

But God's sun, which shines upon the graves of the Christians, shines
as well upon that of the Jewish girl; and the hymns which are sung
beside the Christian graves sound also beside her grave outside the
wall. And out there, too, reaches the promise: "There is resurrection
in Christ, in Him, the Saviour, who said to His Disciples, 'John truly
baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost!'"
