# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_bell_deep
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The bell deep 

"Ding-dong! Ding-dong!" rings out from the Bell Deep in the Odense
River. And what sort of river is that? Why, every child in Odense Town
knows it well. It flows around the foot of the gardens, from the locks
to the water mill, under the wooden bridges. Yellow water lilies grow in
the river, and brown, featherlike reeds, and the black, velvety
bulrushes, so high and so thick. Decayed old willow trees, bent and
gnarled, hang far over the water beside the monks' marsh and the pale
meadows; but a little above are the many gardens, each very different
from the next. Some have beautiful flowers and arbors as clean and neat
as dolls' houses, while some have only cabbages, and in others no
attempts at formal gardens can be seen at all, only great elder trees
stretching out and overhanging the running water, which in places is
deeper that an oar can measure.

The deepest part is right opposite the old nunnery. It is called the
Bell Deep, and it is there that the Merman lives. By day, when the sun
shines through the water, he sleeps, but on clear, starry, or moonlit
nights he comes forth. He is very old; Grandmother has heard of him from
her grandmother, she says; and he lives a lonely life, with hardly
anyone to speak to except the big old church bell. It used to hang up in
the steeple of the church, but now no trace is left either of the
steeple or of the church itself, which used to be called St. Alban's.

"Ding-dong! Ding-dong!" rang the Bell when it hung in the steeple. But
one evening, just as the sun was setting and the Bell was in full swing,
it tore loose and flew through the air, its shining metal glowing in the
red beams of the sunset. "Ding-dong! Ding-dong! Now I'm going to
bed!" sang the Bell, and it flew into the deepest spot of the Odense
River, which is why that spot is now called the Bell Deep. But it found
neither sleep nor rest there, for it still rings and clangs down at the
Merman's; often it can be heard up above, through the water, and many
people say that it rings to foretell the death of someone-but that is
not the reason; no, it really rings to talk to the Merman, who then is
no longer alone.

And what stories does the Bell tell? It is so very old; it was cast
before Grandmother's grandmother was born, yet it was scarcely more
than a child compared with the Merman. He is a quiet, odd-looking old
fellow, with pants of eelskin, a scaly coat decorated with yellow water
lilies, bulrushes in his hair, and duckweeds in his beard. He isn't
exactly handsome to look at.

It would take years and days to repeat everything the Bell has said; it
tells the same stories again and again, in great detail, sometimes
lengthening them, sometimes shortening them, according to its mood. It
tells of the olden times, those hard and gloomy times.

Up to the tower of St. Alban's Church, where the Bell hung, there once
ascended a monk, young and handsome, but deeply thoughtful. He gazed
through the loophole out over the Odense River. In those days its bed
was broad, and the marsh was a lake. He looked across it, and over the
green rampart called "The Nun's Hill," to the cloister beyond, where
a light shone from a nun's cell. He had known her well, and he recalled
that, and his heart beat rapidly at the thought.

"Ding-dong! Ding-dong!" Yes, such are the stories the Bell tells.

"One day the Bishop's silly manservant came up to the tower; and when
I, the Bell, cast as I am from hard and heavy metal, swung to and fro
and rang I almost crushed his head, for he sat down right under me and
played with two sticks, exactly as if they formed a musical instrument.
He sang to them, 'Here I may dare to sing aloud what elsewhere I dare
not whisper-sing of all that is hidden behind locks and bolts. It is
cold and damp there. The rats eat people up alive! No one knows of this;
no one hears of it; even now, for the Bell is ringing so loudly,
Ding-dong! Ding-dong!'

"Then there was a king called Knud. He bowed low before bishops and
monks, but when he unjustly oppressed the people of Vendelbo with heavy
taxes and hard words, they armed themselves with weapons and drove him
away as if he had been a wild beast. He sought refuge in this church and
bolted fast the gate and doors. I have heard tell how the furious mob
surrounded the sacred building, until the crows and ravens, and even the
jackdaws, became alarmed by the tumult. They flew up in and out of the
tower and peered down on the multitude below; they gazed in at the
church windows and shrieked out what they saw.

"King Knud knelt and prayed before the altar while his brothers, Erik
and Benedict, stood guarding him with drawn swords. But the King's
servant, the false Blake, betrayed his master, and when those outside
knew where he could be hit, one of them hurled a stone in through the
windows, and the King lay dead! Then there were shouts and screams from
the angry mob, and cries, too, from the flocks of terrified birds, and I
joined them all. I rang and sang, 'Ding-dong! Ding-dong!'

"The Church Bell hangs high and can see far around; it is visited by
the birds and understands their language. The Wind whispers to it
through the wickets and loopholes and every little crack, and the Wind
knows all things. He hears it from the Air, for the Air surrounds all
living creatures, even enters the lungs of humans, and hears every word
and sigh. Yes, the Air knows all, the Wind tells all, and the Church
Bell understands all and peals it forth to the whole world, 'Ding-dong!
Ding-dong!'

"But all this became too much for me to hear and know; I was no longer
able to ring it all out. I became so tired and so heavy that at last the
beam from which I hung broke, and so I flew through the glowing air down
to the deepest spot of the river, where the Merman lives in solitude and
loneliness. And year in and year out, I tell him all I have seen and all
I have heard. Ding-dong! Ding-dong!"

Thus it sounds from the Bell Deep in the Odense River-at least, so my
grandmother has told me.

But our schoolmaster says there's no bell ringing down there, for there
couldn't be; and there's no Merman down there, for there aren't any
Mermen. And when all the church bells are ringing loudly, he says it's
not the bells, but that it is really the air that makes the sound! And
my grandmother told me that the Bell said the same thing; so, since they
both agree on it, it must be true. The air knows everything. It is
around us and in us; it tells of our thoughts and our actions, and it
voices them longer and farther than the Bell down in the Odense River
hollow where the Merman lives; it voices them into the great vault of
heaven itself, so far, far away, forever and ever, until the bells of
heaven ring out, "Ding-dong! Ding-dong!"
