# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/aunty
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Aunty 

You ought to have known Aunty; she was so lovely. And yet, to be more
specific, she wasn't lovely in the usual sense of the word, but she was
sweet and charming and funny in her own way - just the type to gossip
about when one is in the mood to gossip and be facetious over someone.
She should have been put in a play, just because she herself simply
lived for the theater and everything that goes on in it. She was so very
respectable, even if Agent Nob, whom Aunty called Snob, said she was
stage-struck.

"The theater is my schoolroom," she said, "my fountain of knowledge.
There I have brushed up on my old Biblical history. Take Moses, for
instance, or Joseph and His Brethren - they're operas now. It is from
the theater that I've gained my knowledge of world history, geography,
and human nature. I've learned about Parisian life from French farces -
it's naughty, but very interesting. How I have cried over The
Riquebourg Family - to think that the husband had to drink himself to
death just so his wife could get her young sweetheart! Ah, yes, many's
the tear I've shed in the fifty years I've been going to the
theater!"

Aunty knew every play, every piece of scenery, every actor who came on
or ever had come on. She really only lived during the nine months of the
theatrical season. A summer without a summer stock company was enough to
age her, while an evening at the theater that lasted till past midnight
prolonged her life. She didn't say, as people did, "Now we will have
spring; the stork has come!" or, "There's an item in the paper about
the early strawberries!" Instead, she announced the coming of autumn,
"Have you seen that the box office is open? They'll begin the
performances soon!"

She reckoned the value of a house and its location by its distance from
the theater. She was heartbroken to have to leave the narrow alley
behind the theater and move to a wide street a little farther away, and
live in a house where there were no neighbors opposite her.

"At home my window must be my box at the theater. You can't sit by
yourself without ever seeing people. But where I live now, it seems as
if I've moved way out into the country. If I want to see people, I have
to go into the kitchen and climb up onto the sink. That's the only way
I can see my neighbors. Now, in that old alley of mine I could look
right into the linen dealer's, and then I was only three steps from the
theater; now I am three thousand steps away - a guardsman's steps, at
that!"

Aunty might sometimes be ill, but however badly she happened to feel,
she never missed the theater. One evening her doctor ordered her to put
her feet in sour-dough poultices; she did as he told her, but rode off
to the theater and sat there with her feet in sour dough. If she had
died there it would have pleased her. Thorvaldsen died in the theater;
and she called that "a blessed death."

She could not imagine heaven if there were no theater there; indeed, it
was never promised to us, but it surely was conceivable that the many
great actors and actresses who had gone on before would want to continue
their work.

Aunty had her own private wire from the theater to her room; and the
"telegram" came every Sunday for coffee. Her private wire was Mr.
Sivertsen, of the stage-setting department. It was he who gave the
signal for the raising and lowering of the curtain, the setting or
striking of the scenery.

From him she received a brief, expressive report of each of the plays.
Shakespeare's Tempest he called "detestable stuff - there's so much
to set up! Why, it begins with water down to the first side drop!" That
is to say, the rolling billows extended far forward on the stage. On the
other hand, if a play could go through five acts in one and the same
set, he said it was sensible and well written; it was a play of rest
that could play itself, without all that setting up to do.

In the earlier days, Aunty recalled, meaning some thirty-odd years back,
when she and Mr. Sivertsen were indeed much younger, he was then already
in the mechanical department, and, as she called him, her
"benefactor." At that time it was customary at the town's big and
only theater to admit spectators into the cockloft; every stage
carpenter had one or two places to dispose of. It was often filled to
capacity, and with a very select company; it was said the wives of
generals and councilmen had been there, because it was so interesting to
look down behind the scenes and see how the performers stood and moved
when the curtain was down.

Aunty had been there several times, to tragedies and ballets, for the
productions requiring the largest casts were the most interesting to
watch from the loft. You sat up there in almost complete darkness, and
most people brought their suppers with them. But once three apples and a
package of sandwiches filled with sausage fell straight down into the
prison where Ugolino was about to die of hunger! The sausage produced a
tremendous effect. The audience laughed and cheered, and the sausage was
one of the main reasons why the management decided to forbid admission
to the cockloft.

"But still I've been there thirty-seven times," said Aunty. "And for
that I shall always be grateful to Mr. Sivertsen."

On the last evening that the cockloft was open to the public, they were
giving The Judgment of Solomon. Aunty could remember it so well, for
from her benefactor, Mr. Sivertsen, she had obtained a ticket for Agent
Nob. Not that he deserved it, for he always made fun of the theater and
teased her about it, but still she had got him a seat in the cockloft.
He wanted to look at the goings-on in the theater upside down. "Those
were his very words, and just like him," said Aunty.

And so he saw The Judgment of Solomon from above, and fell asleep. One
would surely have thought that he had come from a big dinner and had
drunk many toasts. He slept until after the theater was locked up and
had to spend the whole dark night up in the loft. He had a story to tell
of his waking up, but Aunty didn't believe a word of it. The Judgment
of Solomon was played out, the lights were out, and all the people were
out, above and below; but then began the epilogue, the real comedy, the
best thing of all, according to the agent. Then life came into the
properties, and it wasn't The Judgment of Solomon that was given now;
no, it was Judgment Day at the Theater. All this Agent Nob impudently
tried to cram into Aunty; that was her thanks for getting him into the
cockloft.

The story the agent told was amusing enough to hear, but there were
mockery and spite behind it.

"It was very dark up there," said the agent, "but then the witchery
began, the great spectacle, Judgment Day at the Theater. Ticket takers
were at the doors, and every spectator had to show his spiritual
testimonial, to decide whether he could enter free or handcuffed, and
with or without a muzzle. Fine society people, who came too late, after
the performance had begun, and young fellows who wasted their time were
hitched outside. There they were muzzled, and had felt soles put under
their shoes, to walk in on in time for the beginning of the next scene.
And then they began Judgment Day at the Theater.

"Purely wickedness," said Aunty, "which our Lord knows nothing
about!"

Had the scene painter wanted to get into heaven he would have had to
climb up some stairs he had painted himself but which were too steep for
anybody to use. That, of course, was because of his sin against
perspective. The stage carpenter who had placed the plants and buildings
in lands where they didn't belong had to move them into their proper
places before cockcrowing time, if he expected to go to heaven. Mr. Nob
would have to watch his own chances of getting there! And to hear what
he said about the actors, both in comedy and tragedy, or in song and
dance - why, it was shameful of Mr. Nob! Mr. Nob! He never deserved his
place in the cockloft! Aunty didn't believe a word of what he said. He
had written it all out, he said - the snob! - and would have it printed,
but not until he was dead and buried, since he had no wish to be skinned
alive.

Only once had Aunty known terror and anguish in her own temple of
happiness, the theater. It was one of those gray winter days when we
have only two hours of foggy daylight; it was cold and snowing, but
Aunty was bound for the theater. They were giving Hermann von Unna,
besides a little opera and a grand ballet, with prologue and epilogue -
it would last well into the night. Aunty had to be there; her lodger had
lent her a pair of sleigh boots, shaggy both outside and inside, that
reached all the way up her legs.

Aunty arrived at the theater and was seated in a box; the boots felt
warm, so she kept them on. Suddenly there arose the cry of "Fire!" as
smoke rolled from one of the wings and down from the cockloft! There was
a fearful panic, and people stormed out. Aunty was sitting farthest from
the door - "second tier, left - hand side; from there the decorations
look best," she said. "They always arrange them so they will look the
prettiest from the King's side of the house." Now she wanted to get
out of there, but the excited people in front of her thoughtlessly
slammed and jammed the door shut. There was Aunty, with no way out and
no way in, for the partitions between the boxes were too high. She
called for help, but nobody heard her. When she looked over at the tier
beneath, she saw it was empty; the balustrade was low; and the drop
wasn't very far. Her fright made her feel young and active, so she
prepared to jump. She got one foot on the seat and the other over the
railing; there she sat astride, well draped in her flowered skirt, with
one long leg dangling below, a leg in a huge sleigh boot. That was a
sight to see! And it was seen, when finally her cries were heard; and
then she was easily rescued, for the fire didn't amount to much.

That was the most memorable evening of her life, she said, and she was
glad she hadn't seen herself, for she would have died of shame!

Her benefactor in the mechanical department, Mr. Sivertsen, came to see
her regularly every Sunday. But it was a long time between Sundays. So
in later years, in the middle of the week, a small child would come to
her for the "leavings"; that is, to get her supper from the remains of
Aunty's dinner.

This little child was a member of the ballet who really needed the food.
She played the roles of a page or a fairy, but her hardest part was the
hind legs of the lion in Mozart's Magic Flute. She eventually grew up
to become the front legs, but for this she was paid only three marks,
while as the hind legs she had received one rix-dollar. She had had to
creep about as the hind legs, stooping, panting for fresh air. This was
very interesting to know, thought Aunty.

Aunty deserved to have lived as long as the theater itself, but she
couldn't hold out that long; nor did she die in the theater, but
quietly and decently in her own bed. Her dying words were full of
significance; she asked, "What are they playing tomorrow?"

She must have left about five hundred rix-dollars; we came to that
conclusion from the yearly rental, which amounted to twenty rix-dollars.
The money was left by Aunty as a legacy for some deserving old spinster
who had no family. It was to be used for a seat in the second tier, left
side, every Saturday, for that was when they gave the best plays. There
was only one condition imposed on the legatee. As she sat in the theater
every Saturday, she was to think of Aunty lying in her grave.

This was Aunty's religion.
