# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/in_a_thousand_years
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## In a thousand years 

Yes, in a thousand years people will fly on the wings of steam through
the air, over the ocean! The young inhabitants of America will become
visitors of old Europe. They will come over to see the monuments and the
great cities, which will then be in ruins, just as we in our time make
pilgrimages to the tottering splendors of Southern Asia.

In a thousand years they will come!

The Thames, the Danube, and the Rhine still roll their course, Mont
Blanc stands firm with its snow-capped summit, and the Northern Lights
gleam over the land of the North; but generation after generation has
become dust, whole rows of the mighty of the moment are forgotten, like
those who already slumber under the hill on which the rich trader, whose
ground it is, has built a bench, on which he can sit and look out across
his waving corn fields.


"To Europe!" cry the young sons of America; "to the land of our
ancestors, the glorious land of monuments and fancy-- to Europe!"

The ship of the air comes. It is crowded with passengers, for the
transit is quicker than by sea. The electro-magnetic wire under the
ocean has already telegraphed the number of the aerial caravan. Europe
is in sight. It is the coast of Ireland that they see, but the
passengers are still asleep; they will not be called till they are
exactly over England. There they will first step on European shore, in
the land of Shakespeare, as the educated call it; in the land of
politics, the land of machines, as it is called by others.

Here they stay a whole day. That is all the time the busy race can
devote to the whole of England and Scotland.


Then the journey is continued through the tunnel under the English
Channel, to France, the land of Charlemagne and Napoleon. Moliere is
named, the learned men talk of the classic school of remote antiquity.
There is rejoicing and shouting for the names of heroes, poets, and men
of science, whom our time does not know, but who will be born after our
time in Paris, the centre of Europe, and elsewhere.

The air steamboat flies over the country whence Columbus went forth,
where Cortez was born, and where Calderon sang dramas in sounding verse.
Beautiful black-eyed women live still in the blooming valleys, and the
oldest songs speak of the Cid and the Alhambra.

Then through the air, over the sea, to Italy, where once lay old,
everlasting Rome. It has vanished! The Campagna lies desert. A single
ruined wall is shown as the remains of St. Peter's, but there is a
doubt if this ruin be genuine.

Next to Greece, to sleep a night in the grand hotel at the top of Mount
Olympus, to say that they have been there; and the journey is continued
to the Bosphorus, to rest there a few hours, and see the place where
Byzantium lay; and where the legend tells that the harem stood in the
time of the Turks, poor fishermen are now spreading their nets.

Over the remains of mighty cities on the broad Danube, cities which we
in our time know not, the travellers pass; but here and there, on the
rich sites of those that time shall bring forth, the caravan sometimes
descends, and departs thence again.

Down below lies Germany, that was once covered with a close net of
railway and canals, the region where Luther spoke, where Goethe sang,
and Mozart once held the sceptre of harmony. Great names shine there, in
science and in art, names that are unknown to us. One day devoted to
seeing Germany, and one for the North, the country of Oersted and
Linnaeus, and for Norway, the land of the old heroes and the young
Normans. Iceland is visited on the journey home. The geysers burn no
more, Hecla is an extinct volcano, but the rocky island is still fixed
in the midst of the foaming sea, a continual monument of legend and
poetry.

"There is really a great deal to be seen in Europe," says the young
American, "and we have seen it in a week, according to the directions
of the great traveller" (and here he mentions the name of one of his
contemporaries) "in his celebrated work, 'How to See All Europe in a
Week.'"
