# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_garden_of_paradise
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The garden of paradise 

There was once a king's son who had a larger and more beautiful
collection of books than any one else in the world, and full of splendid
copper-plate engravings. He could read and obtain information respecting
every people of every land; but not a word could he find to explain the
situation of the garden of paradise, and this was just what he most
wished to know. His grandmother had told him when he was quite a little
boy, just old enough to go to school, that each flower in the garden of
paradise was a sweet cake, that the pistils were full of rich wine, that
on one flower history was written, on another geography or tables; so
those who wished to learn their lessons had only to eat some of the
cakes, and the more they ate, the more history, geography, or tables
they knew. He believed it all then; but as he grew older, and learnt
more and more, he became wise enough to understand that the splendor of
the garden of paradise must be very different to all this. "Oh, why did
Eve pluck the fruit from the tree of knowledge? why did Adam eat the
forbidden fruit?" thought the king's son: "if I had been there it
would never have happened, and there would have been no sin in the
world." The garden of paradise occupied all his thoughts till he
reached his seventeenth year.

One day he was walking alone in the wood, which was his greatest
pleasure, when evening came on. The clouds gathered, and the rain poured
down as if the sky had been a waterspout; and it was as dark as the
bottom of a well at midnight; sometimes he slipped over the smooth
grass, or fell over stones that projected out of the rocky ground. Every
thing was dripping with moisture, and the poor prince had not a dry
thread about him. He was obliged at last to climb over great blocks of
stone, with water spurting from the thick moss. He began to feel quite
faint, when he heard a most singular rushing noise, and saw before him a
large cave, from which came a blaze of light. In the middle of the cave
an immense fire was burning, and a noble stag, with its branching horns,
was placed on a spit between the trunks of two pine-trees. It was
turning slowly before the fire, and an elderly woman, as large and
strong as if she had been a man in disguise, sat by, throwing one piece
of wood after another into the flames.

"Come in," she said to the prince; "sit down by the fire and dry
yourself."

"There is a great draught here," said the prince, as he seated himself
on the ground.

"It will be worse when my sons come home," replied the woman; "you
are now in the cavern of the Winds, and my sons are the four Winds of
heaven: can you understand that?"

"Where are your sons?" asked the prince.

"It is difficult to answer stupid questions," said the woman. "My
sons have plenty of business on hand; they are playing at shuttlecock
with the clouds up yonder in the king's hall," and she pointed
upwards.

"Oh, indeed," said the prince; "but you speak more roughly and
harshly and are not so gentle as the women I am used to."

"Yes, that is because they have nothing else to do; but I am obliged to
be harsh, to keep my boys in order, and I can do it, although they are
so head-strong. Do you see those four sacks hanging on the wall? Well,
they are just as much afraid of those sacks, as you used to be of the
rat behind the looking-glass. I can bend the boys together, and put them
in the sacks without any resistance on their parts, I can tell you.
There they stay, and dare not attempt to come out until I allow them to
do so. And here comes one of them."

It was the North Wind who came in, bringing with him a cold, piercing
blast; large hailstones rattled on the floor, and snowflakes were
scattered around in all directions. He wore a bearskin dress and cloak.
His sealskin cap was drawn over his ears, long icicles hung from his
beard, and one hailstone after another rolled from the collar of his
jacket.

"Don't go too near the fire," said the prince, "or your hands and
face will be frost-bitten."

"Frost-bitten!" said the North Wind, with a loud laugh; "why frost is
my greatest delight. What sort of a little snip are you, and how did you
find your way to the cavern of the Winds?"

"He is my guest," said the old woman, "and if you are not satisfied
with that explanation you can go into the sack. Do you understand me?"

That settled the matter. So the North Wind began to relate his
adventures, whence he came, and where he had been for a whole month. "I
come from the polar seas," he said; "I have been on the Bear's Island
with the Russian walrus-hunters. I sat and slept at the helm of their
ship, as they sailed away from North Cape. Sometimes when I woke, the
storm-birds would fly about my legs. They are curious birds; they give
one flap with their wings, and then on their outstretched pinions soar
far away."

"Don't make such a long story of it," said the mother of the winds;
"what sort of a place is Bear's Island?"

"A very beautiful place, with a floor for dancing as smooth and flat as
a plate. Half-melted snow, partly covered with moss, sharp stones, and
skeletons of walruses and polar-bears, lie all about, their gigantic
limbs in a state of green decay. It would seem as if the sun never shone
there. I blew gently, to clear away the mist, and then I saw a little
hut, which had been built from the wood of a wreck, and was covered with
the skins of the walrus, the fleshy side outwards; it looked green and
red, and on the roof sat a growling bear. Then I went to the sea shore,
to look after birds' nests, and saw the unfledged nestlings opening
their mouths and screaming for food. I blew into the thousand little
throats, and quickly stopped their screaming. Farther on were the
walruses with pig's heads, and teeth a yard long, rolling about like
great worms."

"You relate your adventures very well, my son," said the mother, "it
makes my mouth water to hear you."

"After that," continued the North Wind, "the hunting commenced. The
harpoon was flung into the breast of the walrus, so that a smoking
stream of blood spurted forth like a fountain, and besprinkled the ice.
Then I thought of my own game; I began to blow, and set my own ships,
the great icebergs sailing, so that they might crush the boats. Oh, how
the sailors howled and cried out! but I howled louder than they. They
were obliged to unload their cargo, and throw their chests and the dead
walruses on the ice. Then I sprinkled snow over them, and left them in
their crushed boats to drift southward, and to taste salt water. They
will never return to Bear's Island."

"So you have done mischief," said the mother of the Winds.

"I shall leave others to tell the good I have done," he replied. "But
here comes my brother from the West; I like him best of all, for he has
the smell of the sea about him, and brings in a cold, fresh air as he
enters."

"Is that the little Zephyr?" asked the prince.

"Yes, it is the little Zephyr," said the old woman; "but he is not
little now. In years gone by he was a beautiful boy; now that is all
past."

He came in, looking like a wild man, and he wore a slouched hat to
protect his head from injury. In his hand he carried a club, cut from a
mahogany tree in the American forests, not a trifle to carry.

"Whence do you come?" asked the mother.

"I come from the wilds of the forests, where the thorny brambles form
thick hedges between the trees; where the water-snake lies in the wet
grass, and mankind seem to be unknown."

"What were you doing there?"

"I looked into the deep river, and saw it rushing down from the rocks.
The water drops mounted to the clouds and glittered in the rainbow. I
saw the wild buffalo swimming in the river, but the strong tide carried
him away amidst a flock of wild ducks, which flew into the air as the
waters dashed onwards, leaving the buffalo to be hurled over the
waterfall. This pleased me; so I raised a storm, which rooted up old
trees, and sent them floating down the river."

"And what else have you done?" asked the old woman.

"I have rushed wildly across the savannahs; I have stroked the wild
horses, and shaken the cocoa-nuts from the trees. Yes, I have many
stories to relate; but I need not tell everything I know. You know it
all very well, don't you, old lady?" And he kissed his mother so
roughly, that she nearly fell backwards. Oh, he was, indeed, a wild
fellow.

Now in came the South Wind, with a turban and a flowing Bedouin cloak.

"How cold it is here!" said he, throwing more wood on the fire. "It
is easy to feel that the North Wind has arrived here before me."

"Why it is hot enough here to roast a bear," said the North Wind.

"You are a bear yourself," said the other.

"Do you want to be put in the sack, both of you?" said the old woman.
"Sit down, now, on that stone, yonder, and tell me where you have
been."

"In Africa, mother. I went out with the Hottentots, who were
lion-hunting in the Kaffir land, where the plains are covered with grass
the color of a green olive; and here I ran races with the ostrich, but I
soon outstripped him in swiftness. At last I came to the desert, in
which lie the golden sands, looking like the bottom of the sea. Here I
met a caravan, and the travellers had just killed their last camel, to
obtain water; there was very little for them, and they continued their
painful journey beneath the burning sun, and over the hot sands, which
stretched before them a vast, boundless desert. Then I rolled myself in
the loose sand, and whirled it in burning columns over their heads. The
dromedarys stood still in terror, while the merchants drew their caftans
over their heads, and threw themselves on the ground before me, as they
do before Allah, their god. Then I buried them beneath a pyramid of
sand, which covers them all. When I blow that away on my next visit, the
sun will bleach their bones, and travellers will see that others have
been there before them; otherwise, in such a wild desert, they might not
believe it possible."

"So you have done nothing but evil," said the mother. "Into the sack
with you;" and, before he was aware, she had seized the South Wind
round the body, and popped him into the bag. He rolled about on the
floor, till she sat herself upon him to keep him still.

"These boys of yours are very lively," said the prince.

"Yes," she replied, "but I know how to correct them, when necessary;
and here comes the fourth." In came the East Wind, dressed like a
Chinese.

"Oh, you come from that quarter, do you?" said she; "I thought you
had been to the garden of paradise."

"I am going there to-morrow," he replied; "I have not been there for
a hundred years. I have just come from China, where I danced round the
porcelain tower till all the bells jingled again. In the streets an
official flogging was taking place, and bamboo canes were being broken
on the shoulders of men of every high position, from the first to the
ninth grade. They cried, 'Many thanks, my fatherly benefactor;' but I
am sure the words did not come from their hearts, so I rang the bells
till they sounded, 'ding, ding-dong.'"

"You are a wild boy," said the old woman; "it is well for you that
you are going to-morrow to the garden of paradise; you always get
improved in your education there. Drink deeply from the fountain of
wisdom while you are there, and bring home a bottleful for me."

"That I will," said the East Wind; "but why have you put my brother
South in a bag? Let him out; for I want him to tell me about the
phoenix-bird. The princess always wants to hear of this bird when I pay
her my visit every hundred years. If you will open the sack, sweetest
mother, I will give you two pocketfuls of tea, green and fresh as when I
gathered it from the spot where it grew."

"Well, for the sake of the tea, and because you are my own boy, I will
open the bag."

She did so, and the South Wind crept out, looking quite cast down,
because the prince had seen his disgrace.

"There is a palm-leaf for the princess," he said. "The old phoenix,
the only one in the world, gave it to me himself. He has scratched on it
with his beak the whole of his history during the hundred years he has
lived. She can there read how the old phoenix set fire to his own nest,
and sat upon it while it was burning, like a Hindoo widow. The dry twigs
around the nest crackled and smoked till the flames burst forth and
consumed the phoenix to ashes. Amidst the fire lay an egg, red hot,
which presently burst with a loud report, and out flew a young bird. He
is the only phoenix in the world, and the king over all the other birds.
He has bitten a hole in the leaf which I give you, and that is his
greeting to the princess."

"Now let us have something to eat," said the mother of the Winds. So
they all sat down to feast on the roasted stag; and as the prince sat by
the side of the East Wind, they soon became good friends.

"Pray tell me," said the prince, "who is that princess of whom you
have been talking! and where lies the garden of paradise?"

"Ho! ho!" said the East Wind, "would you like to go there? Well, you
can fly off with me to-morrow; but I must tell you one thing-- no human
being has been there since the time of Adam and Eve. I suppose you have
read of them in your Bible."

"Of course I have," said the prince.

"Well," continued the East Wind, "when they were driven out of the
garden of paradise, it sunk into the earth; but it retained its warm
sunshine, its balmy air, and all its splendor. The fairy queen lives
there, in the island of happiness, where death never comes, and all is
beautiful. I can manage to take you there to-morrow, if you will sit on
my back. But now don't talk any more, for I want to go to sleep;" and
then they all slept.

When the prince awoke in the early morning, he was not a little
surprised at finding himself high up above the clouds. He was seated on
the back of the East Wind, who held him faithfully; and they were so
high in the air that woods and fields, rivers and lakes, as they lay
beneath them, looked like a painted map.

"Good morning," said the East Wind. "You might have slept on a while;
for there is very little to see in the flat country over which we are
passing unless you like to count the churches; they look like spots of
chalk on a green board." The green board was the name he gave to the
green fields and meadows.

"It was very rude of me not to say good-bye to your mother and your
brothers," said the prince.

"They will excuse you, as you were asleep," said the East Wind; and
then they flew on faster than ever.

The leaves and branches of the trees rustled as they passed. When they
flew over seas and lakes, the waves rose higher, and the large ships
dipped into the water like diving swans. As darkness came on, towards
evening, the great towns looked charming; lights were sparkling, now
seen now hidden, just as the sparks go out one after another on a piece
of burnt paper. The prince clapped his hands with pleasure; but the East
Wind advised him not to express his admiration in that manner, or he
might fall down, and find himself hanging on a church steeple. The eagle
in the dark forests flies swiftly; but faster than he flew the East
Wind. The Cossack, on his small horse, rides lightly over the plains;
but lighter still passed the prince on the winds of the wind.

"There are the Himalayas, the highest mountains in Asia," said the
East Wind. "We shall soon reach the garden of paradise now."

Then, they turned southward, and the air became fragrant with the
perfume of spices and flowers. Here figs and pomegranates grew wild, and
the vines were covered with clusters of blue and purple grapes. Here
they both descended to the earth, and stretched themselves on the soft
grass, while the flowers bowed to the breath of the wind as if to
welcome it. "Are we now in the garden of paradise?" asked the prince.

"No, indeed," replied the East Wind; "but we shall be there very
soon. Do you see that wall of rocks, and the cavern beneath it, over
which the grape vines hang like a green curtain? Through that cavern we
must pass. Wrap your cloak round you; for while the sun scorches you
here, a few steps farther it will be icy cold. The bird flying past the
entrance to the cavern feels as if one wing were in the region of
summer, and the other in the depths of winter."

"So this then is the way to the garden of paradise?" asked the prince,
as they entered the cavern. It was indeed cold; but the cold soon
passed, for the East Wind spread his wings, and they gleamed like the
brightest fire. As they passed on through this wonderful cave, the
prince could see great blocks of stone, from which water trickled,
hanging over their heads in fantastic shapes. Sometimes it was so narrow
that they had to creep on their hands and knees, while at other times it
was lofty and wide, like the free air. It had the appearance of a chapel
for the dead, with petrified organs and silent pipes. "We seem to be
passing through the valley of death to the garden of paradise," said
the prince.

But the East Wind answered not a word, only pointed forwards to a lovely
blue light which gleamed in the distance. The blocks of stone assumed a
misty appearance, till at last they looked like white clouds in
moonlight. The air was fresh and balmy, like a breeze from the mountains
perfumed with flowers from a valley of roses. A river, clear as the air
itself, sparkled at their feet, while in its clear depths could be seen
gold and silver fish sporting in the bright water, and purple eels
emitting sparks of fire at every moment, while the broad leaves of the
water-lilies, that floated on its surface, flickered with all the colors
of the rainbow. The flower in its color of flame seemed to receive its
nourishment from the water, as a lamp is sustained by oil. A marble
bridge, of such exquisite workmanship that it appeared as if formed of
lace and pearls, led to the island of happiness, in which bloomed the
garden of paradise. The East Wind took the prince in his arms, and
carried him over, while the flowers and the leaves sang the sweet songs
of his childhood in tones so full and soft that no human voice could
venture to imitate. Within the garden grew large trees, full of sap; but
whether they were palm-trees or gigantic water-plants, the prince knew
not. The climbing plants hung in garlands of green and gold, like the
illuminations on the margins of old missals or twined among the initial
letters. Birds, flowers, and festoons appeared intermingled in seeming
confusion. Close by, on the grass, stood a group of peacocks, with
radiant tails outspread to the sun. The prince touched them, and found,
to his surprise, that they were not really birds, but the leaves of the
burdock tree, which shone with the colors of a peacock's tail. The lion
and the tiger, gentle and tame, were springing about like playful cats
among the green bushes, whose perfume was like the fragrant blossom of
the olive. The plumage of the wood-pigeon glistened like pearls as it
struck the lion's mane with its wings; while the antelope, usually so
shy, stood near, nodding its head as if it wished to join in the frolic.
The fairy of paradise next made her appearance. Her raiment shone like
the sun, and her serene countenance beamed with happiness like that of a
mother rejoicing over her child. She was young and beautiful, and a
train of lovely maidens followed her, each wearing a bright star in her
hair. The East Wind gave her the palm-leaf, on which was written the
history of the phoenix; and her eyes sparkled with joy. She then took
the prince by the hand, and led him into her palace, the walls of which
were richly colored, like a tulip-leaf when it is turned to the sun. The
roof had the appearance of an inverted flower, and the colors grew
deeper and brighter to the gazer. The prince walked to a window, and saw
what appeared to be the tree of knowledge of good and evil, with Adam
and Eve standing by, and the serpent near them. "I thought they were
banished from paradise," he said.

The princess smiled, and told him that time had engraved each event on a
window-pane in the form of a picture; but, unlike other pictures, all
that it represented lived and moved,-- the leaves rustled, and the
persons went and came, as in a looking-glass. He looked through another
pane, and saw the ladder in Jacob's dream, on which the angels were
ascending and descending with outspread wings. All that had ever
happened in the world here lived and moved on the panes of glass, in
pictures such as time alone could produce. The fairy now led the prince
into a large, lofty room with transparent walls, through which the light
shone. Here were portraits, each one appearing more beautiful than the
other-- millions of happy beings, whose laughter and song mingled in one
sweet melody: some of these were in such an elevated position that they
appeared smaller than the smallest rosebud, or like pencil dots on
paper. In the centre of the hall stood a tree, with drooping branches,
from which hung golden apples, both great and small, looking like
oranges amid the green leaves. It was the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, from which Adam and Eve had plucked and eaten the forbidden fruit,
and from each leaf trickled a bright red dewdrop, as if the tree were
weeping tears of blood for their sin. "Let us now take the boat," said
the fairy: "a sail on the cool waters will refresh us. But we shall not
move from the spot, although the boat may rock on the swelling water;
the countries of the world will glide before us, but we shall remain
still."

It was indeed wonderful to behold. First came the lofty Alps, snow-clad,
and covered with clouds and dark pines. The horn resounded, and the
shepherds sang merrily in the valleys. The banana-trees bent their
drooping branches over the boat, black swans floated on the water, and
singular animals and flowers appeared on the distant shore. New Holland,
the fifth division of the world, now glided by, with mountains in the
background, looking blue in the distance. They heard the song of the
priests, and saw the wild dance of the savage to the sound of the drums
and trumpets of bone; the pyramids of Egypt rising to the clouds;
columns and sphinxes, overthrown and buried in the sand, followed in
their turn; while the northern lights flashed out over the extinguished
volcanoes of the north, in fireworks none could imitate.

The prince was delighted, and yet he saw hundreds of other wonderful
things more than can be described. "Can I stay here forever?" asked
he.

"That depends upon yourself," replied the fairy. "If you do not, like
Adam, long for what is forbidden, you can remain here always."

"I should not touch the fruit on the tree of knowledge," said the
prince; "there is abundance of fruit equally beautiful."

"Examine your own heart," said the princess, "and if you do not feel
sure of its strength, return with the East Wind who brought you. He is
about to fly back, and will not return here for a hundred years. The
time will not seem to you more than a hundred hours, yet even that is a
long time for temptation and resistance. Every evening, when I leave
you, I shall be obliged to say, 'Come with me,' and to beckon to you
with my hand. But you must not listen, nor move from your place to
follow me; for with every step you will find your power to resist
weaker. If once you attempted to follow me, you would soon find yourself
in the hall, where grows the tree of knowledge, for I sleep beneath its
perfumed branches. If you stooped over me, I should be forced to smile.
If you then kissed my lips, the garden of paradise would sink into the
earth, and to you it would be lost. A keen wind from the desert would
howl around you; cold rain fall on your head, and sorrow and woe be your
future lot."

"I will remain," said the prince.

So the East Wind kissed him on the forehead, and said, "Be firm; then
shall we meet again when a hundred years have passed. Farewell,
farewell." Then the East Wind spread his broad pinions, which shone
like the lightning in harvest, or as the northern lights in a cold
winter.

"Farewell, farewell," echoed the trees and the flowers.

Storks and pelicans flew after him in feathery bands, to accompany him
to the boundaries of the garden.

"Now we will commence dancing," said the fairy; "and when it is
nearly over at sunset, while I am dancing with you, I shall make a sign,
and ask you to follow me: but do not obey. I shall be obliged to repeat
the same thing for a hundred years; and each time, when the trial is
past, if you resist, you will gain strength, till resistance becomes
easy, and at last the temptation will be quite overcome. This evening,
as it will be the first time, I have warned you."

After this the fairy led him into a large hall, filled with transparent
lilies. The yellow stamina of each flower formed a tiny golden harp,
from which came forth strains of music like the mingled tones of flute
and lyre. Beautiful maidens, slender and graceful in form, and robed in
transparent gauze, floated through the dance, and sang of the happy life
in the garden of paradise, where death never entered, and where all
would bloom forever in immortal youth. As the sun went down, the whole
heavens became crimson and gold, and tinted the lilies with the hue of
roses. Then the beautiful maidens offered to the prince sparkling wine;
and when he had drank, he felt happiness greater than he had ever known
before. Presently the background of the hall opened and the tree of
knowledge appeared, surrounded by a halo of glory that almost blinded
him. Voices, soft and lovely as his mother's sounded in his ears, as if
she were singing to him, "My child, my beloved child." Then the fairy
beckoned to him, and said in sweet accents, "Come with me, come with
me." Forgetting his promise, forgetting it even on the very first
evening, he rushed towards her, while she continued to beckon to him and
to smile. The fragrance around him overpowered his senses, the music
from the harps sounded more entrancing, while around the tree appeared
millions of smiling faces, nodding and singing. "Man should know
everything; man is the lord of the earth." The tree of knowledge no
longer wept tears of blood, for the dewdrops shone like glittering
stars.

"Come, come," continued that thrilling voice, and the prince followed
the call. At every step his cheeks glowed, and the blood rushed wildly
through his veins. "I must follow," he cried; "it is not a sin, it
cannot be, to follow beauty and joy. I only want to see her sleep, and
nothing will happen unless I kiss her, and that I will not do, for I
have strength to resist, and a determined will."

The fairy threw off her dazzling attire, bent back the boughs, and in
another moment was hidden among them.

"I have not sinned yet," said the prince, "and I will not;" and then
he pushed aside the boughs to follow the princess. She was lying already
asleep, beautiful as only a fairy in the garden of paradise could be.
She smiled as he bent over her, and he saw tears trembling out of her
beautiful eyelashes. "Do you weep for me?" he whispered. "Oh weep
not, thou loveliest of women. Now do I begin to understand the happiness
of paradise; I feel it to my inmost soul, in every thought. A new life
is born within me. One moment of such happiness is worth an eternity of
darkness and woe." He stooped and kissed the tears from her eyes, and
touched her lips with his.

A clap of thunder, loud and awful, resounded through the trembling air.
All around him fell into ruin. The lovely fairy, the beautiful garden,
sunk deeper and deeper. The prince saw it sinking down in the dark night
till it shone only like a star in the distance beneath him. Then he felt
a coldness, like death, creeping over him; his eyes closed, and he
became insensible.

When he recovered, a chilling rain was beating upon him, and a sharp
wind blew on his head. "Alas! what have I done?" he sighed; "I have
sinned like Adam, and the garden of paradise has sunk into the earth."
He opened his eyes, and saw the star in the distance, but it was the
morning star in heaven which glittered in the darkness.

Presently he stood up and found himself in the depths of the forest,
close to the cavern of the Winds, and the mother of the Winds sat by his
side. She looked angry, and raised her arm in the air as she spoke.
"The very first evening!" she said. "Well, I expected it! If you were
my son, you should go into the sack."

"And there he will have to go at last," said a strong old man, with
large black wings, and a scythe in his hand, whose name was Death. "He
shall be laid in his coffin, but not yet. I will allow him to wander
about the world for a while, to atone for his sin, and to give him time
to become better. But I shall return when he least expects me. I shall
lay him in a black coffin, place it on my head, and fly away with it
beyond the stars. There also blooms a garden of paradise, and if he is
good and pious he will be admitted; but if his thoughts are bad, and his
heart is full of sin, he will sink with his coffin deeper than the
garden of paradise has sunk. Once in every thousand years I shall go and
fetch him, when he will either be condemned to sink still deeper, or be
raised to a happier life in the world beyond the stars."
