# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/peiter_peter_and_peer
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Peiter, Peter, and Peer 

It is unbelievable all that children know nowadays; one can scarcely say
what they don't know. They no longer believe the old story that the
stork brought them to father and mother out of the well or the millpond
when they were little, and yet it is really true.

But how did the little ones get down into the millpond or the well? Ah,
not everyone knows that, but there are some who do. Have you ever gazed
at the sky on a clear, starry night and watched the many shooting stars?
It is as if the stars fall from and disappear into nowhere. Even the
most learned persons can't explain what they don't know themselves;
but one can explain this when he knows it. It is like a little
Christmas-tree candle that falls from heaven and is blown out. It is a
soul spark from our Lord that flies toward the earth, and when it
reaches our thick, heavy air, it loses its brilliancy, becoming
something that our eyes cannot see, something much finer than air
itself; it is a little child from heaven, a little angel, but without
wings, for it is to become a human child.

Softly it glides through the air, and the wind carries it into a flower,
which may be an orchid, a dandelion, a rose, or a cowslip, and there it
lies and rests itself. And so light and airy is it that a fly can carry
it off, as, of course, a bee can, when they alternately come to seek the
sweetness of the flower. If the little air child lies in their way, they
do not brush it aside. That they wouldn't have the heart to do! They
take it and lay it under the leaf of a water lily in the sunshine, and
from there it crawls and creeps into the water, where it sleeps and
grows until it is large enough for the stork to see and bring to a human
family that has been longing for a sweet little child. But whether it
becomes sweet or not depends on whether it has drunk pure clean water or
has swallowed mud and duckweed the wrong way; that makes one so filthy!

The stork, always without preference, takes the first one he sees. One
goes to kind and loving parents in a fine home; another comes to
unpleasant people in such misery that it would have been much better for
it to have remained in the millpond.

The little ones can never remember afterward what they dreamed while
they were lying under the water-lily leaf, listening to the frogs in the
evening singing, "Coax! Coax! Coax!" In human language that means,
"Now you go to sleep and dream!" Nor can they remember the flower
where they first lay, nor how it smelled; and yet there is always
something inside them, even when they are grown people, which makes them
say, "I like this flower the best." That's because it is the one in
which they were placed when they were air children.

The stork lives to be a very old bird, and he always has interest in the
little ones he has brought and watches how they get along in the world
and how they behave themselves. Of course, he can't do much for them or
change anything in their lives, for he has his own family to look after,
but at least he never lets them get out of his thoughts.

I know a very worthy, honest old stork who has had a great deal of
experience, and has brought many little ones out of the water, and knows
their stories - in which there is always a little mud and duckweed from
the millpond. I begged him to tell me the story of one of them, and he
said I should have three instead of one, and all from the Pietersens'
house.

The Pietersens were an extremely nice family; the father was one of the
thirty-two members of the town council, and that was an honor; he was
completely wrapped up in his work with the thirty-two councilmen. When
the stork brought a little fellow to this home he was named Peiter; the
next year the stork brought another, and they named him Peter, and when
the third one came they called him Peer - for all three names - Peiter,
Peter, and Peer - are parts of the name Pietersen. So there were three
brothers here - three shooting stars - and each had been cradled in a
flower, then laid under the water-lily leaf in the millpond, and brought
from there by the stork to the Pietersen family, whose house is on the
corner, as you surely know.

They grew in body and mind, and wanted to become something more than the
thirty-two councilmen were. Peiter had decided he wanted to be a robber;
he had just seen the play Fra Diavolo, and that had convinced him that a
robber's life was the most delightful in the world. Peter wanted to be
a trash collector. And Peer, who was such a sweet and good boy, round
and plump, whose only fault was biting his nails, wanted to be "Papa."
That was what each of them said he was going to be in life, whenever
anybody asked them about it.

Then they went to school. One was at the head of the class, and one at
the foot, and one in the middle, but in spite of that they could be
equally good and clever, and they were, said their very clearsighted
parents. The three went to children's parties; they smoked when nobody
was watching. They gained knowledge and made acquaintances.

From the time he was quite small, Peiter was quarrelsome, just the way a
robber ought to be. He was a very naughty boy, but his mother said that
came from worms - naughty children always have worms - or from mud in
the stomach. And one day his mother's new silk dress suffered from his
obstinacy and naughtiness.

"Don't push the tea table, my good little lamb," she had said. "You
might tip over the cream pitcher, and then I'd get spots on my new silk
dress."

And so the "good little lamb" firmly took up the cream pitcher and
firmly poured all the cream right into Mamma's lap. Mamma couldn't
help saying, "Oh, lamb, lamb, that was careless of you, lamb!" But she
had to admit that the child had a will of his own. A will means
character, and that's very promising to a mother.

He might, of course, have become a robber, but he didn't, in the actual
sense of the word; he only came to look like one, with his slouch hat,
bare throat, and long, lank hair. He was supposed to be an artist, but
he only got as far as the clothes. He looked like a hollyhock, and all
the people he made drawings of looked like hollyhocks, so lanky were
they. He was very fond of hollyhocks, and the stork said he had lain in
that flower when he was an air child.

Peter must have lain in a buttercup. He looked buttery around the
corners of his mouth, and his skin was so yellow that one would think
that if his cheek were cut, butter would ooze out. He should have been a
butter dealer, and could have been his own signboard; but on the inside
he was a trash collector with a rattle. He was a musician of the
Pietersen family - "musical enough for all of them," the neighbors
said. He composed seventeen new polkas in one week, and then put them
all together and made an opera out of them, with a trumpet and rattle
accompaniment. Ugh! How delightful that was!

Peer was white and red, small and quite ordinary; he had lain in a
daisy. He never hit back when the other boys beat him up; he said he was
the most sensible, and the most sensible always gives way first.

He was a collector, first of slate pencils, and later of letter seals.
Then he got a little cabinet of curiosities of natural history, in which
were the skeleton of a stickleback, three blind baby rats preserved in
alcohol, and a stuffed mole. Peer had a keen appreciation of science and
an eye for the beauties of nature, and that was a comfort to his parents
and to him, too. He preferred wandering in the woods to going to school,
preferred nature to education.

Both his brothers were engaged to be married, but he could think of
nothing but completing his collection of water-bird eggs. He knew much
more about animals than he did about human beings; he even thought we
could never reach the heights of the animals in the feeling we consider
the loftiest of all - love. He saw that when the female nightingale was
setting on the nest, Papa Nightingale would perch on a branch close by
and sing to his little wife all night, "Kluk-kluk! Zi-Zi! Lo-lo-li!"
Peer knew he could never do that or even think of doing such a thing.
When Mamma Stork had her babies in the nest, Father Stork stood guard on
the edge of the roof all night, on one leg. Peer couldn't have stood
that way for an hour!

Then one day when he examined a spider's web, and saw what was in it,
he gave up completely any idea of marriage. Mr. Spider weaves his web
for catching thoughtless flies, old and young, fat and lean; he lives
only to weave and to support his family. But Madam Spider lives only for
him. Out of sheer love she eats him up; she eats his heart, his head,
his stomach, until only his long thin legs are left in the web where he
used to sit, anxious for the welfare of his family. Now that's the real
truth, right out of the natural-history book! When Peer saw all this he
grew very thoughtful; to be so dearly loved by a wife that she eats one
up out of violent love? No! No human being could love like that, and
would it be desirable, anyway?

Peer resolved never to marry, or even to give or take a kiss, for that
might seem the first step toward marriage. But he did receive a kiss,
anyway, the same kiss we all get someday, the great kiss of Death. When
we have lived long enough, Death is given the order, "kiss him away,"
and so away the human goes. A ray of sunshine comes straight from our
Lord, so bright that it almost blinds one. Then the soul that came from
heaven as a shooting star goes back like a shooting star, but this time
not to sleep in a flower or dream beneath the leaf of the water lily; it
has more important things than that to do. It enters the great land of
eternity; but what that is like and what it looks like there, no one can
say. No one has looked into it, not even the stork, though he sees far
and knows much.

The stork knew nothing more of Peer, whereas he could have told me lots
more about Peiter and Peter. But I had heard enough of them, and I
suppose you have, too, so I thanked him and bade him good-by for this
time. But now he demands three frogs and a little snake as payment for
this simple little story - you see, he takes his pay in food. Will you
pay him? I can't; I have neither frogs nor snakes.
