# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_girl_who_trod_on_the_loaf
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The girl who trod on the loaf 

There was once a girl who trod on a loaf to avoid soiling her shoes, and
the misfortunes that happened to her in consequence are well known.
Her name was Inge; she was a poor child, but proud and presuming, and
with a bad and cruel disposition. When quite a little child she would
delight in catching flies, and tearing off their wings, so as to make
creeping things of them. When older, she would take cockchafers and
beetles, and stick pins through them. Then she pushed a green leaf, or a
little scrap of paper towards their feet, and when the poor creatures
would seize it and hold it fast, and turn over and over in their
struggles to get free from the pin, she would say, "The cockchafer is
reading; see how he turns over the leaf." She grew worse instead of
better with years, and, unfortunately, she was pretty, which caused her
to be excused, when she should have been sharply reproved.

"Your headstrong will requires severity to conquer it," her mother
often said to her. "As a little child you used to trample on my apron,
but one day I fear you will trample on my heart." And, alas! this fear
was realized.

Inge was taken to the house of some rich people, who lived at a
distance, and who treated her as their own child, and dressed her so
fine that her pride and arrogance increased.

When she had been there about a year, her patroness said to her, "You
ought to go, for once, and see your parents, Inge."

So Inge started to go and visit her parents; but she only wanted to show
herself in her native place, that the people might see how fine she was.
She reached the entrance of the village, and saw the young laboring men
and maidens standing together chatting, and her own mother amongst them.
Inge's mother was sitting on a stone to rest, with a fagot of sticks
lying before her, which she had picked up in the wood. Then Inge turned
back; she who was so finely dressed she felt ashamed of her mother, a
poorly clad woman, who picked up wood in the forest. She did not turn
back out of pity for her mother's poverty, but from pride.

Another half-year went by, and her mistress said, "you ought to go home
again, and visit your parents, Inge, and I will give you a large wheaten
loaf to take to them, they will be glad to see you, I am sure."

So Inge put on her best clothes, and her new shoes, drew her dress up
around her, and set out, stepping very carefully, that she might be
clean and neat about the feet, and there was nothing wrong in doing so.
But when she came to the place where the footpath led across the moor,
she found small pools of water, and a great deal of mud, so she threw
the loaf into the mud, and trod upon it, that she might pass without
wetting her feet. But as she stood with one foot on the loaf and the
other lifted up to step forward, the loaf began to sink under her, lower
and lower, till she disappeared altogether, and only a few bubbles on
the surface of the muddy pool remained to show where she had sunk. And
this is the story.

But where did Inge go? She sank into the ground, and went down to the
Marsh Woman, who is always brewing there.

The Marsh Woman is related to the elf maidens, who are well-known, for
songs are sung and pictures painted about them. But of the Marsh Woman
nothing is known, excepting that when a mist arises from the meadows, in
summer time, it is because she is brewing beneath them. To the Marsh
Woman's brewery Inge sunk down to a place which no one can endure for
long. A heap of mud is a palace compared with the Marsh Woman's
brewery; and as Inge fell she shuddered in every limb, and soon became
cold and stiff as marble. Her foot was still fastened to the loaf, which
bowed her down as a golden ear of corn bends the stem.

An evil spirit soon took possession of Inge, and carried her to a still
worse place, in which she saw crowds of unhappy people, waiting in a
state of agony for the gates of mercy to be opened to them, and in every
heart was a miserable and eternal feeling of unrest. It would take too
much time to describe the various tortures these people suffered, but
Inge's punishment consisted in standing there as a statue, with her
foot fastened to the loaf. She could move her eyes about, and see all
the misery around her, but she could not turn her head; and when she saw
the people looking at her she thought they were admiring her pretty face
and fine clothes, for she was still vain and proud. But she had
forgotten how soiled her clothes had become while in the Marsh Woman's
brewery, and that they were covered with mud; a snake had also fastened
itself in her hair, and hung down her back, while from each fold in her
dress a great toad peeped out and croaked like an asthmatic poodle.
Worse than all was the terrible hunger that tormented her, and she could
not stoop to break off a piece of the loaf on which she stood. No; her
back was too stiff, and her whole body like a pillar of stone. And then
came creeping over her face and eyes flies without wings; she winked and
blinked, but they could not fly away, for their wings had been pulled
off; this, added to the hunger she felt, was horrible torture.

"If this lasts much longer," she said, "I shall not be able to bear
it." But it did last, and she had to bear it, without being able to
help herself.

A tear, followed by many scalding tears, fell upon her head, and rolled
over her face and neck, down to the loaf on which she stood. Who could
be weeping for Inge? She had a mother in the world still, and the tears
of sorrow which a mother sheds for her child will always find their way
to the child's heart, but they often increase the torment instead of
being a relief. And Inge could hear all that was said about her in the
world she had left, and every one seemed cruel to her. The sin she had
committed in treading on the loaf was known on earth, for she had been
seen by the cowherd from the hill, when she was crossing the marsh and
had disappeared.

When her mother wept and exclaimed, "Ah, Inge! what grief thou hast
caused thy mother" she would say, "Oh that I had never been born! My
mother's tears are useless now."

And then the words of the kind people who had adopted her came to her
ears, when they said, "Inge was a sinful girl, who did not value the
gifts of God, but trampled them under her feet."

"Ah," thought Inge, "they should have punished me, and driven all my
naughty tempers out of me."

A song was made about "The girl who trod on a loaf to keep her shoes
from being soiled," and this song was sung everywhere. The story of her
sin was also told to the little children, and they called her "wicked
Inge," and said she was so naughty that she ought to be punished. Inge
heard all this, and her heart became hardened and full of bitterness.

But one day, while hunger and grief were gnawing in her hollow frame,
she heard a little, innocent child, while listening to the tale of the
vain, haughty Inge, burst into tears and exclaim, "But will she never
come up again?"

And she heard the reply, "No, she will never come up again."

"But if she were to say she was sorry, and ask pardon, and promise
never to do so again?" asked the little one.

"Yes, then she might come; but she will not beg pardon," was the
answer.

"Oh, I wish she would!" said the child, who was quite unhappy about
it. "I should be so glad. I would give up my doll and all my
playthings, if she could only come here again. Poor Inge! it is so
dreadful for her."

These pitying words penetrated to Inge's inmost heart, and seemed to do
her good. It was the first time any one had said, "Poor Inge!" without
saying something about her faults. A little innocent child was weeping,
and praying for mercy for her. It made her feel quite strange, and she
would gladly have wept herself, and it added to her torment to find she
could not do so. And while she thus suffered in a place where nothing
changed, years passed away on earth, and she heard her name less
frequently mentioned. But one day a sigh reached her ear, and the words,
"Inge! Inge! what a grief thou hast been to me! I said it would be
so." It was the last sigh of her dying mother.

After this, Inge heard her kind mistress say, "Ah, poor Inge! shall I
ever see thee again? Perhaps I may, for we know not what may happen in
the future." But Inge knew right well that her mistress would never
come to that dreadful place.

Time passed-- a long bitter time-- then Inge heard her name pronounced
once more, and saw what seemed two bright stars shining above her. They
were two gentle eyes closing on earth. Many years had passed since the
little girl had lamented and wept about "poor Inge." That child was
now an old woman, whom God was taking to Himself. In the last hour of
existence the events of a whole life often appear before us; and this
hour the old woman remembered how, when a child, she had shed tears over
the story of Inge, and she prayed for her now. As the eyes of the old
woman closed to earth, the eyes of the soul opened upon the hidden
things of eternity, and then she, in whose last thoughts Inge had been
so vividly present, saw how deeply the poor girl had sunk. She burst
into tears at the sight, and in heaven, as she had done when a little
child on earth, she wept and prayed for poor Inge. Her tears and her
prayers echoed through the dark void that surrounded the tormented
captive soul, and the unexpected mercy was obtained for it through an
angel's tears. As in thought Inge seemed to act over again every sin
she had committed on earth, she trembled, and tears she had never yet
been able to weep rushed to her eyes. It seemed impossible that the
gates of mercy could ever be opened to her; but while she acknowledged
this in deep penitence, a beam of radiant light shot suddenly into the
depths upon her. More powerful than the sunbeam that dissolves the man
of snow which the children have raised, more quickly than the snowflake
melts and becomes a drop of water on the warm lips of a child, was the
stony form of Inge changed, and as a little bird she soared, with the
speed of lightning, upward to the world of mortals. A bird that felt
timid and shy to all things around it, that seemed to shrink with shame
from meeting any living creature, and hurriedly sought to conceal itself
in a dark corner of an old ruined wall; there it sat cowering and unable
to utter a sound, for it was voiceless. Yet how quickly the little bird
discovered the beauty of everything around it. The sweet, fresh air; the
soft radiance of the moon, as its light spread over the earth; the
fragrance which exhaled from bush and tree, made it feel happy as it sat
there clothed in its fresh, bright plumage. All creation seemed to speak
of beneficence and love. The bird wanted to give utterance to thoughts
that stirred in his breast, as the cuckoo and the nightingale in the
spring, but it could not. Yet in heaven can be heard the song of praise,
even from a worm; and the notes trembling in the breast of the bird were
as audible to Heaven even as the psalms of David before they had
fashioned themselves into words and song.

Christmas-time drew near, and a peasant who dwelt close by the old wall
stuck up a pole with some ears of corn fastened to the top, that the
birds of heaven might have feast, and rejoice in the happy, blessed
time. And on Christmas morning the sun arose and shone upon the ears of
corn, which were quickly surrounded by a number of twittering birds.
Then, from a hole in the wall, gushed forth in song the swelling
thoughts of the bird as he issued from his hiding place to perform his
first good deed on earth,-- and in heaven it was well known who that
bird was.

The winter was very hard; the ponds were covered with ice, and there was
very little food for either the beasts of the field or the birds of the
air. Our little bird flew away into the public roads, and found here and
there, in the ruts of the sledges, a grain of corn, and at the halting
places some crumbs. Of these he ate only a few, but he called around him
the other birds and the hungry sparrows, that they too might have food.
He flew into the towns, and looked about, and wherever a kind hand had
strewed bread on the window-sill for the birds, he only ate a single
crumb himself, and gave all the rest to the rest of the other birds. In
the course of the winter the bird had in this way collected many crumbs
and given them to other birds, till they equalled the weight of the loaf
on which Inge had trod to keep her shoes clean; and when the last
bread-crumb had been found and given, the gray wings of the bird became
white, and spread themselves out for flight.

"See, yonder is a sea-gull!" cried the children, when they saw the
white bird, as it dived into the sea, and rose again into the clear
sunlight, white and glittering. But no one could tell whither it went
then although some declared it flew straight to the sun.
