# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/random
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The snow queen 

First Story
Which Treats of a Mirror and of the Splinters

Now then, let us begin. When we are at the end of the story, we shall
know more than we know now: but to begin.

Once upon a time there was a wicked sprite, indeed he was the most
mischievous of all sprites. One day he was in a very good humor, for he
had made a mirror with the power of causing all that was good and
beautiful when it was reflected therein, to look poor and mean; but that
which was good-for-nothing and looked ugly was shown magnified and
increased in ugliness. In this mirror the most beautiful landscapes
looked like boiled spinach, and the best persons were turned into
frights, or appeared to stand on their heads; their faces were so
distorted that they were not to be recognised; and if anyone had a mole,
you might be sure that it would be magnified and spread over both nose
and mouth.

"That's glorious fun!" said the sprite. If a good thought passed
through a man's mind, then a grin was seen in the mirror, and the
sprite laughed heartily at his clever discovery. All the little sprites
who went to his school -- for he kept a sprite school -- told each other
that a miracle had happened; and that now only, as they thought, it
would be possible to see how the world really looked. They ran about
with the mirror; and at last there was not a land or a person who was
not represented distorted in the mirror. So then they thought they would
fly up to the sky, and have a joke there. The higher they flew with the
mirror, the more terribly it grinned: they could hardly hold it fast.
Higher and higher still they flew, nearer and nearer to the stars, when
suddenly the mirror shook so terribly with grinning, that it flew out of
their hands and fell to the earth, where it was dashed in a hundred
million and more pieces. And now it worked much more evil than before;
for some of these pieces were hardly so large as a grain of sand, and
they flew about in the wide world, and when they got into people's
eyes, there they stayed; and then people saw everything perverted, or
only had an eye for that which was evil. This happened because the very
smallest bit had the same power which the whole mirror had possessed.
Some persons even got a splinter in their heart, and then it made one
shudder, for their heart became like a lump of ice. Some of the broken
pieces were so large that they were used for windowpanes, through which
one could not see one's friends. Other pieces were put in spectacles;
and that was a sad affair when people put on their glasses to see well
and rightly. Then the wicked sprite laughed till he almost choked, for
all this tickled his fancy. The fine splinters still flew about in the
air: and now we shall hear what happened next.

Second Story
A Little Boy and a Little Girl

In a large town, where there are so many houses, and so many people,
that there is no roof left for everybody to have a little garden; and
where, on this account, most persons are obliged to content themselves
with flowers in pots; there lived two little children, who had a garden
somewhat larger than a flower-pot. They were not brother and sister; but
they cared for each other as much as if they were. Their parents lived
exactly opposite. They inhabited two garrets; and where the roof of the
one house joined that of the other, and the gutter ran along the extreme
end of it, there was to each house a small window: one needed only to
step over the gutter to get from one window to the other.

The children's parents had large wooden boxes there, in which
vegetables for the kitchen were planted, and little rosetrees besides:
there was a rose in each box, and they grew splendidly. They now thought
of placing the boxes across the gutter, so that they nearly reached from
one window to the other, and looked just like two walls of flowers. The
tendrils of the peas hung down over the boxes; and the rose-trees shot
up long branches, twined round the windows, and then bent towards each
other: it was almost like a triumphant arch of foliage and flowers. The
boxes were very high, and the children knew that they must not creep
over them; so they often obtained permission to get out of the windows
to each other, and to sit on their little stools among the roses, where
they could play delight fully. In winter there was an end of this
pleasure. The windows were often frozen over; but then they heated
copper farthings on the stove, and laid the hot farthing on the
windowpane, and then they had a capital peep-hole, quite nicely rounded;
and out of each peeped a gentle friendly eye -- it was the little boy
and the little girl who were looking out. His name was Kay, hers was
Gerda. In summer, with one jump, they could get to each other; but in
winter they were obliged first to go down the long stairs, and then up
the long stairs again: and out-of-doors there was quite a snow-storm.

"It is the white bees that are swarming," said Kay's old grandmother.

"Do the white bees choose a queen?" asked the little boy; for he knew
that the honey-bees always have one.

"Yes," said the grandmother, "she flies where the swarm hangs in the
thickest clusters. She is the largest of all; and she can never remain
quietly on the earth, but goes up again into the black clouds. Many a
winter's night she flies through the streets of the town, and peeps in
at the windows; and they then freeze in so wondrous a manner that they
look like flowers."

"Yes, I have seen it," said both the children; and so they knew that
it was true.

"Can the Snow Queen come in?" said the little girl.

"Only let her come in!" said the little boy. "Then I'd put her on
the stove, and she'd melt."

And then his grandmother patted his head and told him other stories.

In the evening, when little Kay was at home, and half undressed, he
climbed up on the chair by the window, and peeped out of the little
hole. A few snow-flakes were falling, and one, the largest of all,
remained lying on the edge of a flower-pot.

The flake of snow grew larger and larger; and at last it was like a
young lady, dressed in the finest white gauze, made of a million little
flakes like stars. She was so beautiful and delicate, but she was of
ice, of dazzling, sparkling ice; yet she lived; her eyes gazed fixedly,
like two stars; but there was neither quiet nor repose in them. She
nodded towards the window, and beckoned with her hand. The little boy
was frightened, and jumped down from the chair; it seemed to him as if,
at the same moment, a large bird flew past the window.

The next day it was a sharp frost -- and then the spring came; the sun
shone, the green leaves appeared, the swallows built their nests, the
windows were opened, and the little children again sat in their pretty
garden, high up on the leads at the top of the house.

That summer the roses flowered in unwonted beauty. The little girl had
learned a hymn, in which there was something about roses; and then she
thought of her own flowers; and she sang the verse to the little boy,
who then sang it with her:

"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet, And angels descend there
the children to greet."

And the children held each other by the hand, kissed the roses, looked
up at the clear sunshine, and spoke as though they really saw angels
there. What lovely summer-days those were! How delightful to be out in
the air, near the fresh rose-bushes, that seem as if they would never
finish blossoming!

Kay and Gerda looked at the picture-book full of beasts and of birds;
and it was then -- the clock in the church-tower was just striking five
-- that Kay said, "Oh! I feel such a sharp pain in my heart; and now
something has got into my eye!"

The little girl put her arms around his neck. He winked his eves; now
there was nothing to be seen.

"I think it is out now," said he; but it was not. It was just one of
those pieces of glass from the magic mirror that had got into his eye;
and poor Kay had got another piece right in his heart. It will soon
become like ice. It did not hurt any longer, but there it was.

"What are you crying for?" asked he. "You look so ugly! There's
nothing the matter with me. Ah," said he at once, "that rose is
cankered! And look, this one is quite crooked! After all, these roses
are very ugly! They are just like the box they are planted in!" And
then he gave the box a good kick with his foot, and pulled both the
roses up.

"What are you doing?" cried the little girl; and as he perceived her
fright, he pulled up another rose, got in at the window, and hastened
off from dear little Gerda.

Afterwards, when she brought her picture-book, he asked, "What horrid
beasts have you there?" And if his grandmother told them stories, he
always interrupted her; besides, if he could manage it, he would get
behind her, put on her spectacles, and imitate her way of speaking; he
copied all her ways, and then everybody laughed at him. He was soon able
to imitate the gait and manner of everyone in the street. Everything
that was peculiar and displeasing in them -- that Kay knew how to
imitate: and at such times all the people said, "The boy is certainly
very clever!" But it was the glass he had got in his eye; the glass
that was sticking in his heart, which made him tease even little Gerda,
whose whole soul was devoted to him.

His games now were quite different to what they had formerly been, they
were so very knowing. One winter's day, when the flakes of snow were
flying about, he spread the skirts of his blue coat, and caught the snow
as it fell.

"Look through this glass, Gerda," said he. And every flake seemed
larger, and appeared like a magnificent flower, or beautiful star; it
was splendid to look at!

"Look, how clever!" said Kay. "That's much more interesting than
real flowers! They are as exact as possible; there i not a fault in
them, if they did not melt!"

It was not long after this, that Kay came one day with large gloves on,
and his little sledge at his back, and bawled right into Gerda's ears,
"I have permission to go out into the square where the others are
playing"; and off he was in a moment.

There, in the market-place, some of the boldest of the boys used to tie
their sledges to the carts as they passed by, and so they were pulled
along, and got a good ride. It was so capital! Just as they were in the
very height of their amusement, a large sledge passed by: it was painted
quite white, and there was someone in it wrapped up in a rough white
mantle of fur, with a rough white fur cap on his head. The sledge drove
round the square twice, and Kay tied on his sledge as quickly as he
could, and off he drove with it. On they went quicker and quicker into
the next street; and the person who drove turned round to Kay, and
nodded to him in a friendly manner, just as if they knew each other.
Every time he was going to untie his sledge, the person nodded to him,
and then Kay sat quiet; and so on they went till they came outside the
gates of the town. Then the snow began to fall so thickly that the
little boy could not see an arm's length before him, but still on he
went: when suddenly he let go the string he held in his hand in order to
get loose from the sledge, but it was of no use; still the little
vehicle rushed on with the quickness of the wind. He then cried as loud
as he could, but no one beard him; the snow drifted and the sledge flew
on, and sometimes it gave a jerk as though they were driving over hedges
and ditches. He was quite frightened, and he tried to repeat the Lord's
Prayer; but all he could do, he was only able to remember the
multiplication table.

The snow-flakes grew larger and larger, till at last they looked just
like great white fowls. Suddenly they flew on one side; the large sledge
stopped, and the person who drove rose up. It was a lady; her cloak and
cap were of snow. She was tall and of slender figure, and of a dazzling
whiteness. It was the Snow Queen.

"We have travelled fast," said she; "but it is freezingly cold. Come
under my bearskin." And she put him in the sledge beside her, wrapped
the fur round him, and he felt as though he were sinking in a
snow-wreath.

"Are you still cold?" asked she; and then she kissed his forehead. Ah!
it was colder than ice; it penetrated to his very heart, which was
already almost a frozen lump; it seemed to him as if he were about to
die -- but a moment more and it was quite congenial to him, and he did
not remark the cold that was around him.

"My sledge! Do not forget my sledge!" It was the first thing he
thought of. It was there tied to one of the white chickens, who flew
along with it on his back behind the large sledge. The Snow Queen kissed
Kay once more, and then he forgot little Gerda, grandmother, and all
whom he had left at his home.

"Now you will have no more kisses," said she, "or else I should kiss
you to death!"

Kay looked at her. She was very beautiful; a more clever, or a more
lovely countenance he could not fancy to himself; and she no longer
appeared of ice as before, when she sat outside the window, and beckoned
to him; in his eyes she was perfect, he did not fear her at all, and
told her that he could calculate in his head and with fractions, even;
that he knew the number of square miles there were in the different
countries, and how many inhabitants they contained; and she smiled while
he spoke. It then seemed to him as if what he knew was not enough, and
he looked upwards in the large huge empty space above him, and on she
flew with him; flew high over,the black clouds, while the storm moaned
and whistled as though it were singing some old tune. On they flew over
woods and lakes, over seas, and many lands; and beneath them the
chilling storm rushed fast, the wolves howled, the snow crackled; above
them flew large screaming crows, but higher up appeared the moon, quite
large and bright; and it was on it that Kay gazed during the long long
winter's night; while by day he slept at the feet of the Snow Queen.

Third Story
Of the Flower-Garden At the Old Woman's Who Understood Witchcraft

But what became of little Gerda when Kay did not return? Where could he
be? Nobody knew; nobody could give any intelligence. All the boys knew
was, that they had seen him tie his sledge to another large and splendid
one, which drove down the street and out of the town. Nobody knew where
he was; many sad tears were shed, and little Gerda wept long and
bitterly; at last she said he must be dead; that he had been drowned in
the river which flowed close to the town. Oh! those were very long and
dismal winter evenings!

At last spring came, with its warm sunshine.

"Kay is dead and gone!" said little Gerda.

"That I don't believe," said the Sunshine.

"Kay is dead and gone!" said she to the Swallows.

"That I don't believe," said they: and at last little Gerda did not
think so any longer either.

"I'll put on my red shoes," said she, one morning; "Kay has never
seen them, and then I'll go down to the river and ask there."

It was quite early; she kissed her old grandmother, who was still
asleep, put on her red shoes, and went alone to the river.

"Is it true that you have taken my little playfellow? I will make you a
present of my red shoes, if you will give him back to me."

And, as it seemed to her, the blue waves nodded in a strange manner;
then she took off her red shoes, the most precious things she possessed,
and threw them both into the river. But they fell close to the bank, and
the little waves bore them immediately to land; it was as if the stream
would not take what was dearest to her; for in reality it had not got
little, Kay; but Gerda thought that she had not thrown the shoes out far
enough, so she clambered into a boat which lay among the rushes, went to
the farthest end, and threw out the shoes. But the boat was not
fastened, and the motion which she occasioned, made it drift from the
shore. She observed this, and hastened to get back; but before she could
do so, the boat was more than a yard from the land, and was gliding
quickly onward.

Little Gerda was very frightened, and began to cry; but no one heard her
except the sparrows, and they could not carry her to land; but they flew
along the bank, and sang as if to comfort her, "Here we are! Here we
are!" The boat drifted with the stream, little Gerda sat quite still
without shoes, for they were swimming behind the boat, but she could not
reach them, because the boat went much faster than they did.

The banks on both sides were beautiful; lovely flowers, venerable trees,
and slopes with sheep and cows, but not a human being was to be seen.

"Perhaps the river will carry me to little Kay," said she; and then
she grew less sad. She rose, and looked for many hours at the beautiful
green banks. Presently she sailed by a large cherry-orchard, where was a
little cottage with curious red and blue windows; it was thatched, and
before it two wooden soldiers stood sentry, and presented arms when
anyone went past.

Gerda called to them, for she thought they were alive; but they, of
course, did not answer. She came close to them, for the stream drifted
the boat quite near the land.

Gerda called still louder, and an old woman then came out of the
cottage, leaning upon a crooked stick. She had a large broad-brimmed hat
on, painted with the most splendid flowers.

"Poor little child!" said the old woman. "How did you get upon the
large rapid river, to be driven about so in the wide world!" And then
the old woman went into the water, caught hold of the boat with her
crooked stick, drew it to the bank, and lifted little Gerda out.

And Gerda was so glad to be on dry land again; but she was rather afraid
of the strange old woman.

"But come and tell me who you are, and how you came here," said she.

And Gerda told her all; and the old woman shook her head and said,
"A-hem! a-hem!" and when Gerda had told her everything, and asked her
if she had not seen little Kay, the woman answered that he had not
passed there, but he no doubt would come; and she told her not to be
cast down, but taste her cherries, and look at her flowers, which were
finer than any in a picture-book, each of which could tell a whole
story. She then took Gerda by the hand, led her into the little cottage,
and locked the door.

The windows were very high up; the glass was red, blue, and green, and
the sunlight shone through quite wondrously in all sorts of colors. On
the table stood the most exquisite cherries, and Gerda ate as many as
she chose, for she had permission to do so. While she was eating, the
old woman combed her hair with a golden comb, and her hair curled and
shone with a lovely golden color around that sweet little face, which
was so round and so like a rose.

"I have often longed for such a dear little girl," said the old woman.
"Now you shall see how well we agree together"; and while she combed
little Gerda's hair, the child forgot her foster-brother Kay more and
more, for the old woman understood magic; but she was no evil being, she
only practised witchcraft a little for her own private amusement, and
now she wanted very much to keep little Gerda. She therefore went out in
the garden, stretched out.her crooked stick towards the rose-bushes,
which, beautifully as they were blowing, all sank into the earth and no
one could tell where they had stood. The old woman feared that if Gerda
should see the roses, she would then think of her own, would remember
little Kay, and run away from her.

She now led Gerda into the flower-garden. Oh, what odour and what
loveliness was there! Every flower that one could think of, and of every
season, stood there in fullest bloom; no picture-book could be gayer or
more beautiful. Gerda jumped for joy, and played till the sun set behind
the tall cherry-tree; she then had a pretty bed, with a red silken
coverlet filled with blue violets. She fell asleep, and had as pleasant
dreams as ever a queen on her wedding-day.

The next morning she went to play with the flowers in the warm sunshine,
and thus passed away a day. Gerda knew every flower; and, numerous as
they were, it still seemed to Gerda that one was wanting, though she did
not know which. One day while she was looking at the hat of the old
woman painted with flowers, the most beautiful of them all seemed to her
to be a rose. The old woman had forgotten to take it from her hat when
she made the others vanish in the earth. But so it is when one's
thoughts are not collected. "What!" said Gerda. "Are there no roses
here?" and she ran about amongst the flowerbeds, and looked, and
looked, but there was not one to be found. She then sat down and wept;
but her hot tears fell just where a rose-bush had sunk; and when her
warm tears watered the ground, the tree shot up suddenly as fresh and
blooming as when it had been swallowed up. Gerda kissed the roses,
thought of her own dear roses at home, and with them of little Kay.

"Oh, how long I have stayed!" said the little girl. "I intended to
look for Kay! Don't you know where he is?" she asked of the roses.
"Do you think he is dead and gone?"

"Dead he certainly is not," said the Roses. "We have been in the
earth where all the dead are, but Kay was not there."

"Many thanks!" said little Gerda; and she went to the other flowers,
looked into their cups, and asked, "Don't you know where little Kay
is?"

But every flower stood in the sunshine, and dreamed its own fairy tale
or its own story: and they all told her very many things, but not one
knew anything of Kay.

Well, what did the Tiger-Lily say?

"Hearest thou not the drum? Bum! Bum! Those are the only two tones.
Always bum! Bum! Hark to the plaintive song of the old woman, to the
call of the priests! The Hindoo woman in her long robe stands upon the
funeral pile; the flames rise around her and her dead husband, but the
Hindoo woman thinks on the living one in the surrounding circle; on him
whose eyes burn hotter than the flames -- on him, the fire of whose eyes
pierces her heart more than the flames which soon will burn her body to
ashes. Can the heart's flame die in the flame of the funeral pile?"

"I don't understand that at all," said little Gerda.

"That is my story," said the Lily.

What did the Convolvulus say?

"Projecting over a narrow mountain-path there hangs an old feudal
castle. Thick evergreens grow on the dilapidated walls, and around the
altar, where a lovely maiden is standing: she bends over the railing and
looks out upon the rose. No fresher rose hangs on the branches than she;
no appleblossom carried away by the wind is more buoyant! How her silken
robe is rustling! Is he not yet come?"

"Is it Kay that you mean?" asked little Gerda.

"I am speaking about my story -- about my dream," answered the
Convolvulus.

What did the Snowdrops say?

"Between the trees a long board is hanging -- it is a swing. Two little
girls are sitting in it, and swing themselves backwards and forwards;
their frocks are as white as snow, and long green silk ribands flutter
from their bonnets. Their brother, who is older than they are, stands up
in the swing; he twines his arms round the cords to hold himself fast,
for in one hand he has a little cup, and in the other a clay-pipe. He is
blowing soap-bubbles. The swing moves, and the bubbles float in charming
changing colors: the last is still hanging to the end of the pipe, and
rocks in the breeze. The swing moves. The little black dog, as light as
a soap-bubble, jumps up on his hind legs to try to get into the swing.
It moves, the dog falls down, barks, and is angry. They tease him; the
bubble bursts! A swing, a bursting bubble -- such is my song!"

"What you relate may be very pretty, but you tell it in so melancholy a
manner, and do not mention Kay."

What do the Hyacinths say?

"There were once upon a time three sisters, quite transparent, and very
beautiful. The robe of the one was red, that of the second blue, and
that of the third white. They danced hand in hand beside the calm lake
in the clear moonshine. They were not elfin maidens, but mortal
children. A sweet fragrance was smelt, and the maidens vanished in the
wood; the fragrance grew stronger -- three coffins, and in them three
lovely maidens, glided out of the forest and across the lake: the
shining glow-worms flew around like little floating lights. Do the
dancing maidens sleep, or are they dead? The odour of the flowers says
they are corpses; the evening bell tolls for the dead!"

"You make me quite sad," said little Gerda. "I cannot help thinking
of the dead maidens. Oh! is little Kay really dead? The Roses have been
in the earth, and they say no."

"Ding, dong!" sounded the Hyacinth bells. "We do not toll for little
Kay; we do not know him. That is our way of singing, the only one we
have."

And Gerda went to the Ranunculuses, that looked forth from among the
shining green leaves.

"You are a little bright sun!" said Gerda. "Tell me if you know where
I can find my playfellow."

And the Ranunculus shone brightly, and looked again at Gerda. What song
could the Ranunculus sing? It was one that said nothing about Kay
either.

"In a small court the bright sun was shining in the first days of
spring. The beams glided down the white walls of a neighbor's house,
and close by the fresh yellow flowers were growing, shining like gold in
the warm sun-rays. An old grandmother was sitting in the air; her
grand-daughter, the poor and lovely servant just come for a short visit.
She knows her grandmother. There was gold, pure virgin gold in that
blessed kiss. There, that is my little story," said the Ranunculus.

"My poor old grandmother!" sighed Gerda. "Yes, she is longing for me,
no doubt: she is sorrowing for me, as she did for little Kay. But I will
soon come home, and then I will bring Kay with me. It is of no use
asking the flowers; they only know their own old rhymes, and can tell me
nothing." And she tucked up her frock, to enable her to run quicker;
but the Narcissus gave her a knock on the leg, just as she was going to
jump over it. So she stood still, looked at the long yellow flower, and
asked, "You perhaps know something?" and she bent down to the
Narcissus. And what did it say?

"I can see myself -- I can see myself I Oh, how odorous I am! Up in the
little garret there stands, half-dressed, a little Dancer. She stands
now on one leg, now on both; she despises the whole world; yet she lives
only in imagination. She pours water out of the teapot over a piece of
stuff which she holds in her hand; it is the bodice; cleanliness is a
fine thing. The white dress is hanging on the hook; it was washed in the
teapot, and dried on the roof. She puts it on, ties a saffron-colored
kerchief round her neck, and then the gown looks whiter. I can see
myself -- I can see myself!"

"That's nothing to me," said little Gerda. "That does not concern
me." And then off she ran to the further end of the garden.

The gate was locked, but she shook the rusted bolt till it was loosened,
and the gate opened; and little Gerda ran off barefooted into the wide
world. She looked round her thrice, but no one followed her. At last she
could run no longer; she sat down on a large stone, and when she looked
about her, she saw that the summer had passed; it was late in the
autumn, but that one could not remark in the beautiful garden, where
there was always sunshine, and where there were flowers the whole year
round.

"Dear me, how long I have staid!" said Gerda. "Autumn is come. I must
not rest any longer." And she got up to go further.

Oh, how tender and wearied her little feet were! All around it looked so
cold and raw: the long willow-leaves were quite yellow, and the fog
dripped from them like water; one leaf fell after the other: the sloes
only stood full of fruit, which set one's teeth on edge. Oh, how dark
and comfortless it was in the dreary world!

Fourth Story
The Prince and Princess

Gerda was obliged to rest herself again, when, exactly opposite to her,
a large Raven came hopping over the white snow. He had long been looking
at Gerda and shaking his head; and now he said, "Caw! Caw!" Good day!
Good day! He could not say it better; but he felt a sympathy for the
little girl, and asked her where she was going all alone. The word
"alone" Gerda understood quite well, and felt how much was expressed
by it; so she told the Raven her whole history, and asked if he had not
seen Kay.

The Raven nodded very gravely, and said, "It may be -- it may be!"

"What, do you really think so?" cried the little girl; and she nearly
squeezed the Raven to death, so much did she kiss him.

"Gently, gently," said the Raven. "I think I know; I think that it
may be little Kay. But now he has forgotten you for the Princess."

"Does he live with a Princess?" asked Gerda.

"Yes -- listen," said the Raven; "but it will be difficult for me to
speak your language. If you understand the Raven language I can tell you
better."

"No, I have not learnt it," said Gerda; "but my grandmother
understands it, and she can speak gibberish too. I wish I had learnt
it."

"No matter," said the Raven; "I will tell you as well as I can;
however, it will be bad enough." And then he told all he knew.

In the kingdom where we now are there lives a Princess, who is
extraordinarily clever; for she has read all the newspapers in the whole
world, and has forgotten them again -- so clever is she. She was lately,
it is said, sitting on her throne -- which is not very amusing after all
-- when she began humming an old tune, and it was just, 'Oh, why should
I not be married?' 'That song is not without its meaning,' said she,
and so then she was determined to marry; but she would have a husband
who knew how to give an answer when he was spoken to -- not one who
looked only as if he were a great personage, for that is so tiresome.
She then had all the ladies of the court drummed together; and when they
heard her intention, all were very pleased, and said, 'We are very glad
to hear it; it is the very thing we were thinking of.' You may believe
every word I say, said the Raven; for I have a tame sweetheart that hops
about in the palace quite free, and it was she who told me all this.

The newspapers appeared forthwith with a border of hearts and the
initials of the Princess; and therein you might read that every
good-looking young man was at liberty to come to the palace and speak to
the Princess; and he who spoke in such wise as showed he felt himself at
home there, that one the Princess would choose for her husband.

"Yes, Yes," said the Raven, "you may believe it; it is as true as I
am sitting here. People came in crowds; there was a crush and a hurry,
but no one was successful either on the first or second day. They could
all talk well enough when they were out in the street; but as soon as
they came inside the palace gates, and saw the guard richly dressed in
silver, and the lackeys in gold on the staircase, and the large
illuminated saloons, then they were abashed; and when they stood before
the throne on which the Princess was sitting, all they could do was to
repeat the last word they had uttered, and to hear it again did not
interest her very much. It was just as if the people within were under a
charm, and had fallen into a trance till they came out again into the
street; for then -- oh, then -- they could chatter enough. There was a
whole row of them standing from the town-gates to the palace. I was
there myself to look," said the Raven. "They grew hungry and thirsty;
but from the palace they got nothing whatever, not even a glass of
water. Some of the cleverest, it is true, had taken bread and butter
with them: but none shared it with his neighbor, for each thought, 'Let
him look hungry, and then the Princess won't have him'."

"But Kay -- little Kay," said Gerda, "when did he come? Was he among
the number?"

"Patience, patience; we are just come to him. It was on the third day
when a little personage without horse or equipage, came marching right
boldly up to the palace; his eyes shone like yours, he had beautiful
long hair, but his clothes were very shabby."

"That was Kay," cried Gerda, with a voice of delight. "Oh, now I've
found him!" and she clapped her hands for joy.

"He had a little knapsack at his back," said the Raven.

"No, that was certainly his sledge," said Gerda; "for when he went
away he took his sledge with him."

"That may be," said the Raven; "I did not examine him so minutely;
but I know from my tame sweetheart, that when he came into the
court-yard of the palace, and saw the body-guard in silver, the lackeys
on the staircase, he was not the least abashed; he nodded, and said to
them, 'It must be very tiresome to stand on the stairs; for my part, I
shall go in.' The saloons were gleaming with lustres -- privy
councillors and excellencies were walking about barefooted, and wore
gold keys; it was enough to make any one feel uncomfortable. His boots
creaked, too, so loudly, but still he was not at all afraid."

"That's Kay for certain," said Gerda. "I know he had on new boots; I
have heard them creaking in grandmama's room."

"Yes, they creaked," said the Raven. "And on he went boldly up to the
Princess, who was sitting on a pearl as large as a spinning-wheel. All
the ladies of the court, with their attendants and attendants'
attendants, and all the cavaliers, with their gentlemen and gentlemen's
gentlemen, stood round; and the nearer they stood to the door, the
prouder they looked. It was hardly possible to look at the gentleman's
gentleman, so very haughtily did he stand in the doorway."

"It must have been terrible," said little Gerda. "And did Kay get the
Princess?"

"Were I not a Raven, I should have taken the Princess myself, although
I am promised. It is said he spoke as well as I speak when I talk Raven
language; this I learned from my tame sweetheart. He was bold and nicely
behaved; he had not come to woo the Princess, but only to hear her
wisdom. She pleased him, and he pleased her."

"Yes, yes; for certain that was Kay," said Gerda. "He was so clever;
he could reckon fractions in his head. Oh, won't you take me to the
palace?"

"That is very easily said," answered the Raven. "But how are we to
manage it? I'll speak to my tame sweetheart about it: she must advise
us; for so much I must tell you, such a little girl as you are will
never get permission to enter."

"Oh, yes I shall," said Gerda; "when Kay hears that I am here, he
will come out directly to fetch me."

"Wait for me here on these steps," said the Raven.He moved his head
backwards and forwards and flew away.

The evening was closing in when the Raven returned. "Caw --caw!" said
he. "She sends you her compliments; and here is a roll for you. She
took it out of the kitchen, where there is bread enough. You are hungry,
no doubt. It is not possible for you to enter the palace, for you are
barefooted: the guards in silver, and the lackeys in gold, would not
allow it; but do not cry, you shall come in still. My sweetheart knows a
little back stair that leads to the bedchamber, and she knows where she
can get the key of it."

And they went into the garden in the large avenue, where one leaf was
falling after the other; and when the lights in the palace had all
gradually disappeared, the Raven led little Gerda to the back door,
which stood half open.

Oh, how Gerda's heart beat with anxiety and longing! It was just as if
she had been about to do something wrong; and yet she only wanted to
know if little Kay was there. Yes, he must be there. She called to mind
his intelligent eyes, and his long hair, so vividly, she could quite see
him as he used to laugh when they were sitting under the roses at home.
"He will, no doubt, be glad to see you -- to hear what a long way you
have come for his sake; to know how unhappy all at home were when he did
not come back."

Oh, what a fright and a joy it was!

They were now on the stairs. A single lamp was burning there; and on the
floor stood the tame Raven, turning her head on every side and looking
at Gerda, who bowed as her grandmother had taught her to do.

"My intended has told me so much good of you, my dear young lady,"
said the tame Raven. "Your tale is very affecting. If you will take the
lamp, I will go before. We will go straight on, for we shall meet no
one."

"I think there is somebody just behind us," said Gerda; and something
rushed past: it was like shadowy figures on the wall; horses with
flowing manes and thin legs, huntsmen, ladies and gentlemen on
horseback.

"They are only dreams," said the Raven. "They come to fetch the
thoughts of the high personages to the chase; 'tis well, for now you
can observe them in bed all the better. But let me find, when you enjoy
honor and distinction, that you possess a grateful heart."

"Tut! That's not worth talking about," said the Raven of the woods.

They now entered the first saloon, which was of rose-colored satin, with
artificial flowers on the wall. Here the dreams were rushing past, but
they hastened by so quickly that Gerda could not see the high
personages. One hall was more magnificent than the other; one might
indeed well be abashed; and at last they came into the bedchamber. The
ceiling of the room resembled a large palm-tree with leaves of glass, of
costly glass; and in the middle, from a thick golden stem, hung two
beds, each of which resembled a lily. One was white, and in this lay the
Princess; the other was red, and it was here that Gerda was to look for
little Kay. She bent back one of the red leaves, and saw a brown neck.
Oh! that was Kay! She called him quite loud by name, held the lamp
towards him -- the dreams rushed back again into the chamber -- he
awoke, turned his head, and -- it was not little Kay!

The Prince was only like him about the neck; but he was young and
handsome. And out of the white lily leaves the Princess peeped, too, and
asked what was the matter. Then little Gerda cried, and told her her
whole history, and all that the Ravens had done for her.

"Poor little thing!" said the Prince and the Princess. They praised
the Ravens very much, and told them they were not at all angry with
them, but they were not to do so again. However, they should have a
reward. "Will you fly about here at liberty," asked the Princess; "or
would you like to have a fixed appointment as court ravens, with all the
broken bits from the kitchen?"

And both the Ravens nodded, and begged for a fixed appointment; for they
thought of their old age, and said, "It is a good thing to have a
provision for our old days."

And the Prince got up and let Gerda sleep in his bed, and more than this
he could not do. She folded her little hands and thought, "How good men
and animals are!" and she then fell asleep and slept soundly. All the
dreams flew in again, and they now looked like the angels; they drew a
little sledge, in which little Kay sat and nodded his head; but the
whole was only a dream, and therefore it all vanished as soon as she
awoke.

The next day she was dressed from head to foot in silk and velvet. They
offered to let her stay at the palace, and lead a happy life; but she
begged to have a little carriage with a horse in front, and for a small
pair of shoes; then, she said, she would again go forth in the wide
world and look for Kay.

Shoes and a muff were given her; she was, too, dressed very nicely; and
when she was about to set off, a new carriage stopped before the door.
It was of pure gold, and the arms of the Prince and Princess shone like
a star upon it; the coachman, the footmen, and the outriders, for
outriders were there, too, all wore golden crowns. The Prince and the
Princess assisted her into the carriage themselves, and wished her all
success. The Raven of the woods, who was now married, accompanied her
for the first three miles. He sat beside Gerda, for he could not bear
riding backwards; the other Raven stood in the doorway,and flapped her
wings; she could not accompany Gerda, because she suffered from headache
since she had had a fixed appointment and ate so much. The carriage was
lined inside with sugar-plums, and in the seats were fruits and
gingerbread.

"Farewell! Farewell!" cried Prince and Princess; and Gerda wept, and
the Raven wept. Thus passed the first miles; and then the Raven bade her
farewell, and this was the most painful separation of all. He flew into
a tree, and beat his black wings as long as he could see the carriage,
that shone from afar like a sunbeam.

Fifth Story
The Little Robber Maiden

They drove through the dark wood; but the carriage shone like a torch,
and it dazzled the eyes of the robbers, so that they could not bear to
look at it.

"'Tis gold! 'Tis gold!" they cried; and they rushed forward, seized
the horses, knocked down the little postilion, the coachman, and the
servants, and pulled little Gerda out of the carriage.

"How plump, how beautiful she is! She must have been fed on
nut-kernels," said the old female robber, who had a long, scrubby
beard, and bushy eyebrows that hung down over her eyes. "She is as good
as a fatted lamb! How nice she will be!" And then she drew out a knife,
the blade of which shone so that it was quite dreadful to behold.

"Oh!" cried the woman at the same moment. She had been bitten in the
ear by her own little daughter, who hung at her back; and who was so
wild and unmanageable, that it was quite amusing to see her. "You
naughty child!" said the mother: and now she had not time to kill
Gerda.

"She shall play with me," said the little robber child. "She shall
give me her muff, and her pretty frock; she shall sleep in my bed!" And
then she gave her mother another bite, so that she jumped, and ran round
with the pain; and the Robbers laughed, and said, "Look, how she is
dancing with the little one!"

"I will go into the carriage," said the little robber maiden; and she
would have her will, for she was very spoiled and very headstrong. She
and Gerda got in; and then away they drove over the stumps of felled
trees, deeper and deeper into the woods. The little robber maiden was as
tall as Gerda, but stronger, broader-shouldered, and of dark complexion;
her eyes were quite black; they looked almost melancholy. She embraced
little Gerda, and said, "They shall not kill you as long as I am not
displeased with you. You are, doubtless, a Princess?"

"No," said little Gerda; who then related all that had happened to
her, and how much she cared about little Kay.

The little robber maiden looked at her with a serious air, nodded her
head slightly, and said, "They shall not kill you, even if I am angry
with you: then I will do it myself"; and she dried Gerda's eyes, and
put both her hands in the handsome muff, which was so soft and warm.

At length the carriage stopped. They were in the midst of the court-yard
of a robber's castle. It was full of cracks from top to bottom; and out
of the openings magpies and rooks were flying; and the great bull-dogs,
each of which looked as if he could swallow a man, jumped up, but they
did not bark, for that was forbidden.

In the midst of the large, old, smoking hall burnt a great fire on the
stone floor. The smoke disappeared under the stones, and had to seek its
own egress. In an immense caldron soup was boiling; and rabbits and
hares were being roasted on a spit.

"You shall sleep with me to-night, with all my animals," said the
little robber maiden. They had something to eat and drink; and then went
into a corner, where straw and carpets were lying. Beside them, on laths
and perches, sat nearly a hundred pigeons, all asleep, seemingly; but
yet they moved a little when the robber maiden came. "They are all
mine," said she, at the same time seizing one that was next to her by
the legs and shaking it so that its wings fluttered. "Kiss it," cried
the little girl, and flung the pigeon in Gerda's face. "Up there is
the rabble of the wood," continued she, pointing to several laths which
were fastened before a hole high up in the wall; "that's the rabble;
they would all fly away immediately, if they were not well fastened in.
And here is my dear old Bac"; and she laid hold of the horns of a
reindeer, that had a bright copper ring round its neck, and was tethered
to the spot. "We are obliged to lock this fellow in too, or he would
make his escape. Every evening I tickle his neck with my sharp knife; he
is so frightened at it!" and the little girl drew forth a long knife,
from a crack in the wall, and let it glide over the Reindeer's neck.
The poor animal kicked; the girl laughed, and pulled Gerda into bed with
her.

"Do you intend to keep your knife while you sleep?" asked Gerda;
looking at it rather fearfully.

"I always sleep with the knife," said the little robber maiden.
"There is no knowing what may happen. But tell me now, once more, all
about little Kay; and why you have started off in the wide world
alone." And Gerda related all, from the very beginning: the
Wood-pigeons cooed above in their cage, and the others slept. The little
robber maiden wound her arm round Gerda's neck, held the knife in the
other hand, and snored so loud that everybody could hear her; but Gerda
could not close her eyes, for she did not know whether she was to live
or die. The robbers sat round the fire, sang and drank; and the old
female robber jumped about so, that it was quite dreadful for Gerda to
see her.

Then the Wood-pigeons said, "Coo! Cool We have seen little Kay! A white
hen carries his sledge; he himself sat in the carriage of the Snow
Queen, who passed here, down just over the wood, as we lay in our nest.
She blew upon us young ones; and all died except we two. Coo! Coo!"

"What is that you say up there?" cried little Gerda. "Where did the
Snow Queen go to? Do you know anything about it?"

"She is no doubt gone to Lapland; for there is always snow and ice
there. Only ask the Reindeer, who is tethered there."

"Ice and snow is there! There it is, glorious and beautiful!" said the
Reindeer. "One can spring about in the large shining valleys! The Snow
Queen has her summer-tent there; but her fixed abode is high up towards
the North Pole, on the Island called Spitzbergen."

"Oh, Kay! Poor little Kay!" sighed Gerda.

"Do you choose to be quiet?" said the robber maiden. "If you don't,
I shall make you."

In the morning Gerda told her all that the Wood-pigeons had said; and
the little maiden looked very serious, but she nodded her head, and
said, "That's no matter-that's no matter. Do you know where Lapland
lies!" she asked of the Reindeer.

"Who should know better than I?" said the animal; and his eyes rolled
in his head. "I was born and bred there -- there I leapt about on the
fields of snow."

"Listen," said the robber maiden to Gerda. "You see that the men are
gone; but my mother is still here, and will remain. However, towards
morning she takes a draught out of the large flask, and then she sleeps
a little: then I will do something for you." She now jumped out of bed,
flew to her mother; with her arms round her neck, and pulling her by the
beard, said, "Good morrow, my own sweet nanny-goat of a mother." And
her mother took hold of her nose, and pinched it till it was red and
blue; but this was all done out of pure love.

When the mother had taken a sup at her flask, and was having a nap, the
little robber maiden went to the Reindeer, and said, "I should very
much like to give you still many a tickling with the sharp knife, for
then you are so amusing; however, I will untether you, and help you out,
so that you may go back to Lapland. But you must make good use of your
legs; and take this little girl for me to the palace of the Snow Queen,
where her playfellow is. You have heard, I suppose, all she said; for
she spoke loud enough, and you were listening."

The Reindeer gave a bound for joy. The robber maiden lifted up little
Gerda, and took the precaution to bind her fast on the Reindeer's back;
she even gave her a small cushion to sit on. "Here are your worsted
leggins, for it will be cold; but the muff I shall keep for myself, for
it is so very pretty. But I do not wish you to be cold. Here is a pair
of lined gloves of my mother's; they just reach up to your elbow. On
with them! Now you look about the hands just like my ugly old mother!"

And Gerda wept for joy.

"I can't bear to see you fretting," said the little robber maiden.
"This is just the time when you ought to look pleased. Here are two
loaves and a ham for you, so that you won't starve." The bread and the
meat were fastened to the Reindeer's back; the little maiden opened the
door, called in all the dogs, and then with her knife cut the rope that
fastened the animal, and said to him, "Now, off with you; but take good
care of the little girl!"

And Gerda stretched out her hands with the large wadded gloves towards
the robber maiden, and said, "Farewell!" and the Reindeer flew on over
bush and bramble through the great wood, over moor and heath, as fast as
he could go.

"Ddsa! Ddsa!" was heard in the sky. It was just as if somebody was
sneezing.

"These are my old northern-lights," said the Reindeer, "look how they
gleam!" And on he now sped still quicker -- day and night on he went:
the loaves were consumed, and the ham too; and now they were in Lapland.

Sixth Story
The Lapland Woman and the Finland Woman

Suddenly they stopped before a little house, which looked very
miserable. The roof reached to the ground; and the door was so low, that
the family were obliged to creep upon their stomachs when they went in
or out. Nobody was at home except an old Lapland woman, who was dressing
fish by the light of an oil lamp. And the Reindeer told her the whole of
Gerda's history, but first of all his own; for that seemed to him of
much greater importance. Gerda was so chilled that she could not speak.

"Poor thing," said the Lapland woman, "you have far to run still. You
have more than a hundred miles to go before you get to Finland; there
the Snow Queen has her country-house, and burns blue lights every
evening. I will give you a few words from me, which I will write on a
dried haberdine, for paper I have none; this you can take with you to
the Finland woman, and she will be able to give you more information
than I can."

When Gerda had warmed herself, and had eaten and drunk, the Lapland
woman wrote a few words on a dried haberdine, begged Gerda to take care
of them, put her on the Reindeer, bound her fast, and away sprang the
animal. "Ddsa! Ddsa!" was again heard in the air; the most charming
blue lights burned the whole night in the sky, and at last they came to
Finland. They knocked at the chimney of the Finland woman; for as to a
door, she had none.

There was such a heat inside that the Finland woman herself went about
almost naked. She was diminutive and dirty. She immediately loosened
little Gerda's clothes, pulled off her thick gloves and boots; for
otherwise the heat would have been too great -- and after laying a piece
of ice on the Reindeer's head, read what was written on the fish-skin.
She read it three times: she then knew it by heart; so she put the fish
into the cupboard -- for it might very well be eaten, and she never
threw anything away.

Then the Reindeer related his own story first, and afterwards that of
little Gerda; and the Finland woman winked her eyes, but said nothing.

"You are so clever," said the Reindeer; "you can, I know, twist all
the winds of the world together in a knot. If the seaman loosens one
knot, then he has a good wind; if a second, then it blows pretty
stiffly; if he undoes the third and fourth, then it rages so that the
forests are upturned. Will you give the little maiden a potion, that she
may possess the strength of twelve men, and vanquish the Snow Queen?"

"The strength of twelve men!" said the Finland woman. "Much good that
would be!" Then she went to a cupboard, and drew out a large skin
rolled up. When she had unrolled it, strange characters were to be seen
written thereon; and the Finland woman read at such a rate that the
perspiration trickled down her forehead.

But the Reindeer begged so hard for little Gerda, and Gerda looked so
imploringly with tearful eyes at the Finland woman, that she winked, and
drew the Reindeer aside into a corner, where they whispered together,
while the animal got some fresh ice put on his head.

"'Tis true, little Kay is at the Snow Queen's, and finds everything
there quite to his taste; and he thinks it the very best place in the
world; but the reason of that is, he has a splinter of glass in his eye,
and in his heart. These must be got out first; otherwise he will never
go back to mankind, and the Snow Queen will retain her power over him."

"But can you give little Gerda nothing to take which will endue her
with power over the whole?"

"I can give her no more power than what she has already." - "Don't
you see how great it is? Don't you see how men and animals are forced
to serve her; how well she gets through the world barefooted? She must
not hear of her power from us; that power lies in her heart, because she
is a sweet and innocent child! If she cannot get to the Snow Queen by
herself, and rid little Kay of the glass, we cannot help her. Two miles
hence the garden of the Snow Queen begins; thither you may carry the
little girl. Set her down by the large bush with red berries, standing
in the snow; don't stay talking, but hasten back as fast as possible."
And now the Finland woman placed little Gerda on the Reindeer's back,
and off he ran with all imaginable speed.

"Oh! I have not got my boots! I have not brought my gloves!" cried
little Gerda. She remarked she was without them from the cutting frost;
but the Reindeer dared not stand still; on he ran till he came to the
great bush with the red berries, and there he set Gerda down, kissed her
mouth, while large bright tears flowed from the animal's eyes, and then
back he went as fast as possible. There stood poor Gerda now, without
shoes or gloves, in the very middle of dreadful icy Finland.

She ran on as fast as she could. There then came a whole regiment of
snow-flakes, but they did not fall from above, and they were quite
bright and shining from the Aurora Borealis. The flakes ran along the
ground, and the nearer they came the larger they grew. Gerda well
remembered how large and strange the snow-flakes appeared when she once
saw them through a magnifying-glass; but now they were large and
terrific in another manner -- they were all alive. They were the
outposts of the Snow Queen. They had the most wondrous shapes; some
looked like large ugly porcupines; others like snakes knotted together,
with their heads sticking out; and others, again, like small fat bears,
with the hair standing on end: all were of dazzling whiteness -- all
were living snow-flakes.

Little Gerda repeated the Lord's Prayer. The cold was so intense that
she could see her own breath, which came like smoke out of her mouth. It
grew thicker and thicker, and took the form of little angels, that grew
more and more when they touched the earth. All had helms on their heads,
and lances and shields in their hands; they increased in numbers; and
when Gerda had finished the Lord's Prayer, she was surrounded by a
whole legion. They thrust at the horrid snow-flakes with their spears,
so that they flew into a thousand pieces; and little Gerda walked on
bravely and in security. The angels patted her hands and feet; and then
she felt the cold less, and went on quickly towards the palace of the
Snow Queen.

But now we shall see how Kay fared. He never thought of Gerda, and least
of all that she was standing before the palace.

Seventh Story
What Took Place in the Palace of the Snow Queen, and what Happened
Afterward

The walls of the palace were of driving snow, and the windows and doors
of cutting winds. There were more than a hundred halls there, according
as the snow was driven by the winds. The largest was many miles in
extent; all were lighted up by the powerful Aurora Borealis, and all
were so large, so empty, so icy cold, and so resplendent! Mirth never
reigned there; there was never even a little bear-ball, with the storm
for music, while the polar bears went on their hindlegs and showed off
their steps. Never a little tea-party of white young lady foxes; vast,
cold, and empty were the halls of the Snow Queen. The northern-lights
shone with such precision that one could tell exactly when they were at
their highest or lowest degree of brightness. In the middle of the
empty, endless hall of snow, was a frozen lake; it was cracked in a
thousand pieces, but each piece was so like the other, that it seemed
the work of a cunning artificer. In the middle of this lake sat the Snow
Queen when she was at home; and then she said she was sitting in the
Mirror of Understanding, and that this was the only one and the best
thing in the world.

Little Kay was quite blue, yes nearly black with cold; but he did not
observe it, for she had kissed away all feeling of cold from his body,
and his heart was a lump of ice. He was dragging along some pointed flat
pieces of ice, which he laid together in all possible ways, for he
wanted to make something with them; just as we have little flat pieces
of wood to make geometrical figures with, called the Chinese Puzzle. Kay
made all sorts of figures, the most complicated, for it was an
ice-puzzle for the understanding. In his eyes the figures were
extraordinarily beautiful, and of the utmost importance; for the bit of
glass which was in his eye caused this. He found whole figures which
represented a written word; but he never could manage to represent just
the word he wanted -- that word was "eternity"; and the Snow Queen had
said, "If you can discover that figure, you shall be your own master,
and I will make you a present of the whole world and a pair of new
skates." But he could not find it out.

"I am going now to warm lands," said the Snow Queen. "I must have a
look down into the black caldrons." It was the volcanoes Vesuvius and
Etna that she meant. "I will just give them a coating of white, for
that is as it ought to be; besides, it is good for the oranges and the
grapes." And then away she flew, and Kay sat quite alone in the empty
halls of ice that were miles long, and looked at the blocks of ice, and
thought and thought till his skull was almost cracked. There he sat
quite benumbed and motionless; one would have imagined he was frozen to
death.

Suddenly little Gerda stepped through the great portal into the palace.
The gate was formed of cutting winds; but Gerda repeated her evening
prayer, and the winds were laid as though they slept; and the little
maiden entered the vast, empty, cold halls. There she beheld Kay: she
recognised him, flew to embrace him, and cried out, her arms firmly
holding him the while, "Kay, sweet little Kay! Have I then found you at
last?"

But he sat quite still, benumbed and cold. Then little Gerda shed
burning tears; and they fell on his bosom, they penetrated to his heart,
they thawed the lumps of ice, and consumed the splinters of the
looking-glass; he looked at her, and she sang the hymn:

"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet,
And angels descend there the children to greet."

Hereupon Kay burst into tears; he wept so much that the splinter rolled
out of his eye, and he recognised her, and shouted, "Gerda, sweet
little Gerda! Where have you been so long? And where have I been?" He
looked round him. "How cold it is here!" said he. "How empty and
cold!" And he held fast by Gerda, who laughed and wept for joy. It was
so beautiful, that even the blocks of ice danced about for joy; and when
they were tired and laid themselves down, they formed exactly the
letters which the Snow Queen had told him to find out; so now he was his
own master, and he would have the whole world and a pair of new skates
into the bargain.

Gerda kissed his cheeks, and they grew quite blooming; she kissed his
eyes, and they shone like her own; she kissed his hands and feet, and he
was again well and merry. The Snow Queen might come back as soon as she
liked; there stood his discharge written in resplendent masses of ice.

They took each other by the hand, and wandered forth out of the large
hall; they talked of their old grandmother, and of the roses upon the
roof; and wherever they went, the winds ceased raging, and the sun burst
forth. And when they reached the bush with the red berries, they found
the Reindeer waiting for them. He had brought another, a young one, with
him, whose udder was filled with milk, which he gave to the little ones,
and kissed their lips. They then carried Kay and Gerda -- first to the
Finland woman, where they warmed themselves in the warm room, and
learned what they were to do on their journey home; and they went to the
Lapland woman, who made some new clothes for them and repaired their
sledges.

The Reindeer and the young hind leaped along beside them, and
accompanied them to the boundary of the country. Here the first
vegetation peeped forth; here Kay and Gerda took leave of the Lapland
woman. "Farewell! Farewell!" they all said. And the first green buds
appeared, the first little birds began to chirrup; and out of the wood
came, riding on a magnificent horse, which Gerda knew (it was one of the
leaders in the golden carriage), a young damsel with a bright-red cap on
her head, and armed with pistols. It was the little robber maiden, who,
tired of being at home, had determined to make a journey to the north;
and afterwards in another direction, if that did not please her. She
recognised Gerda immediately, and Gerda knew her too. It was a joyful
meeting.

"You are a fine fellow for tramping about," said she to little Kay;
"I should like to know, faith, if you deserve that one should run from
one end of the world to the other for your sake?"

But Gerda patted her cheeks, and inquired for the Prince and Princess.

"They are gone abroad," said the other.

"But the Raven?" asked little Gerda.

"Oh! The Raven is dead," she answered. "His tame sweetheart is a
widow, and wears a bit of black worsted round her leg; she laments most
piteously, but it's all mere talk and stuff! Now tell me what you've
been doing and how you managed to catch him."

And Gerda and Kay both told their story.

And "Schnipp-schnapp-schnurre-basselurre," said the robber maiden; and
she took the hands of each, and promised that if she should some day
pass through the town where they lived, she would come and visit them;
and then away she rode. Kay and Gerda took each other's hand: it was
lovely spring weather, with abundance of flowers and of verdure. The
church-bells rang, and the children recognised the high towers, and the
large town; it was that in which they dwelt. They entered and hastened
up to their grandmother's room, where everything was standing as
formerly. The clock said "tick! tack!" and the finger moved round; but
as they entered, they remarked that they were now grown up. The roses on
the leads hung blooming in at the open window; there stood the little
children's chairs, and Kay and Gerda sat down on them, holding each
other by the hand; they both had forgotten the cold empty splendor of
the Snow Queen, as though it had been a dream. The grandmother sat in
the bright sunshine, and read aloud from the Bible: "Unless ye become
as little children, ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven."

And Kay and Gerda looked in each other's eyes, and all at once they
understood the old hymn:

"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet,
And angels descend there the children to greet."

There sat the two grown-up persons; grown-up, and yet children; children
at least in heart; and it was summer-time; summer, glorious summer!
