# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_snowdrop
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The snowdrop 

It was winter-time; the air was cold, the wind was sharp, but within the
closed doors it was warm and comfortable, and within the closed door lay
the flower; it lay in the bulb under the snow-covered earth.

One day rain fell. The drops penetrated through the snowy covering down
into the earth, and touched the flower-bulb, and talked of the bright
world above. Soon the Sunbeam pierced its way through the snow to the
root, and within the root there was a stirring.

"Come in," said the flower.

"I cannot," said the Sunbeam. "I am not strong enough to unlock the
door! When the summer comes I shall be strong!"

"When will it be summer?" asked the Flower, and she repeated this
question each time a new sunbeam made its way down to her. But the
summer was yet far distant. The snow still lay upon the ground, and
there was a coat of ice on the water every night.

"What a long time it takes! what a long time it takes!" said the
Flower. "I feel a stirring and striving within me; I must stretch
myself, I must unlock the door, I must get out, and must nod a good
morning to the summer, and what a happy time that will be!"

And the Flower stirred and stretched itself within the thin rind which
the water had softened from without, and the snow and the earth had
warmed, and the Sunbeam had knocked at; and it shot forth under the snow
with a greenish-white blossom on a green stalk, with narrow thick
leaves, which seemed to want to protect it. The snow was cold, but was
pierced by the Sunbeam, therefore it was easy to get through it, and now
the Sunbeam came with greater strength than before.

"Welcome, welcome!" sang and sounded every ray, and the Flower lifted
itself up over the snow into the brighter world. The Sunbeams caressed
and kissed it, so that it opened altogether, white as snow, and
ornamented with green stripes. It bent its head in joy and humility.

"Beautiful Flower!" said the Sunbeams, "how graceful and delicate you
are! You are the first, you are the only one! You are our love! You are
the bell that rings out for summer, beautiful summer, over country and
town. All the snow will melt; the cold winds will be driven away; we
shall rule; all will become green, and then you will have companions,
syringas, laburnums, and roses; but you are the first, so graceful, so
delicate!"

That was a great pleasure. It seemed as if the air were singing and
sounding, as if rays of light were piercing through the leaves and the
stalks of the Flower. There it stood, so delicate and so easily broken,
and yet so strong in its young beauty; it stood there in its white dress
with the green stripes, and made a summer. But there was a long time yet
to the summer-time. Clouds hid the sun, and bleak winds were blowing.

"You have come too early," said Wind and Weather. "We have still the
power, and you shall feel it, and give it up to us. You should have
stayed quietly at home and not have run out to make a display of
yourself. Your time is not come yet!"

It was a cutting cold! The days which now come brought not a single
sunbeam. It was weather that might break such a little Flower in two
with cold. But the Flower had more strength than she herself knew of.
She was strong in joy and in faith in the summer, which would be sure to
come, which had been announced by her deep longing and confirmed by the
warm sunlight; and so she remained standing in confidence in the snow in
her white garment, bending her head even while the snow-flakes fell
thick and heavy, and the icy winds swept over her.

"You'll break!" they said, "and fade, and fade! What did you want
out here? Why did you let yourself be tempted? The Sunbeam only made
game of you. Now you have what you deserve, you summer gauk."

"Summer gauk!" she repeated in the cold morning hour.

"O summer gauk!" cried some children rejoicingly; "yonder stands
one-- how beautiful, how beautiful! The first one, the only one!"

These words did the Flower so much good, they seemed to her like warm
sunbeams. In her joy the Flower did not even feel when it was broken
off. It lay in a child's hand, and was kissed by a child's mouth, and
carried into a warm room, and looked on by gentle eyes, and put into
water. How strengthening, how invigorating! The Flower thought she had
suddenly come upon the summer.

The daughter of the house, a beautiful little girl, was confirmed, and
she had a friend who was confirmed, too. He was studying for an
examination for an appointment. "He shall be my summer gauk," she
said; and she took the delicate Flower and laid it in a piece of scented
paper, on which verses were written, beginning with summer gauk and
ending with summer gauk. "My friend, be a winter gauk." She had
twitted him with the summer. Yes, all this was in the verses, and the
paper was folded up like a letter, and the Flower was folded in the
letter, too. It was dark around her, dark as in those days when she lay
hidden in the bulb. The Flower went forth on her journey, and lay in the
post-bag, and was pressed and crushed, which was not at all pleasant;
but that soon came to an end.

The journey was over; the letter was opened, and read by the dear
friend. How pleased he was! He kissed the letter, and it was laid, with
its enclosure of verses, in a box, in which there were many beautiful
verses, but all of them without flowers; she was the first, the only
one, as the Sunbeams had called her; and it was a pleasant thing to
think of that.

She had time enough, moreover, to think about it; she thought of it
while the summer passed away, and the long winter went by, and the
summer came again, before she appeared once more. But now the young man
was not pleased at all. He took hold of the letter very roughly, and
threw the verses away, so that the Flower fell on the ground. Flat and
faded she certainly was, but why should she be thrown on the ground?
Still, it was better to be here than in the fire, where the verses and
the paper were being burnt to ashes. What had happened? What happens so
often:-- the Flower had made a gauk of him, that was a jest; the girl
had made a fool of him, that was no jest, she had, during the summer,
chosen another friend.

Next morning the sun shone in upon the little flattened Snowdrop, that
looked as if it had been painted upon the floor. The servant girl, who
was sweeping out the room, picked it up, and laid it in one of the books
which were upon the table, in the belief that it must have fallen out
while the room was being arranged. Again the flower lay among verses--
printed verses-- and they are better than written ones-- at least, more
money has been spent upon them.

And after this years went by. The book stood upon the book-shelf, and
then it was taken up and somebody read out of it. It was a good book;
verses and songs by the old Danish poet, Ambrosius Stub, which are well
worth reading. The man who was now reading the book turned over a page.
"Why, there's a flower!" he said; "a snowdrop, a summer gauk, a poet
gauk! That flower must have been put in there with a meaning! Poor
Ambrosius Stub! he was a summer fool too, a poet fool; he came too
early, before his time, and therefore he had to taste the sharp winds,
and wander about as a guest from one noble landed proprietor to another,
like a flower in a glass of water, a flower in rhymed verses! Summer
fool, winter fool, fun and folly-- but the first, the only, the fresh
young Danish poet of those days. Yes, thou shalt remain as a token in
the book, thou little snowdrop: thou hast been put there with a
meaning."

And so the Snowdrop was put back into the book, and felt equally honored
and pleased to know that it was a token in the glorious book of songs,
and that he who was the first to sing and to write had been also a
snowdrop, had been a summer gauk, and had been looked upon in the
winter-time as a fool. The Flower understood this, in her way, as we
interpret everything in our way.

That is the story of the Snowdrop.
