# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/soup_from_a_sausage_skewer
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Soup from a sausage skewer 

"We had such an excellent dinner yesterday," said an old mouse of the
female sex to another who had not been present at the feast. "I sat
number twenty-one below the mouse-king, which was not a bad place. Shall
I tell you what we had? Everything was first rate. Mouldy bread, tallow
candle, and sausage. And then, when we had finished that course, the
same came on all over again; it was as good as two feasts. We were very
sociable, and there was as much joking and fun as if we had been all of
one family circle. Nothing was left but the sausage skewers, and this
formed a subject of conversation, till at last it turned to the proverb,
'Soup from sausage skins;' or, as the people in the neighboring
country call it, 'Soup from a sausage skewer.' Every one had heard the
proverb, but no one had ever tasted the soup, much less prepared it. A
capital toast was drunk to the inventor of the soup, and some one said
he ought to be made a relieving officer to the poor. Was not that witty?
Then the old mouse-king rose and promised that the young lady-mouse who
should learn how best to prepare this much-admired and savory soup
should be his queen, and a year and a day should be allowed for the
purpose."

"That was not at all a bad proposal," said the other mouse; "but how
is the soup made?"

"Ah, that is more than I can tell you. All the young lady mice were
asking the same question. They wished very much to be queen, but they
did not want to take the trouble of going out into the world to learn
how to make soup, which was absolutely necessary to be done first. But
it is not every one who would care to leave her family, or her happy
corner by the fire-side at home, even to be made queen. It is not always
easy to find bacon and cheese-rind in foreign lands every day, and it is
not pleasant to have to endure hunger, and be perhaps, after all, eaten
up alive by the cat."

Most probably some such thoughts as these discouraged the majority from
going out into the world to collect the required information. Only four
mice gave notice that they were ready to set out on the journey. They
were young and lively, but poor. Each of them wished to visit one of the
four divisions of the world, so that it might be seen which was the most
favored by fortune. Every one took a sausage skewer as a traveller's
staff, and to remind them of the object of their journey. They left home
early in May, and none of them returned till the first of May in the
following year, and then only three of them. Nothing was seen or heard
of the fourth, although the day of decision was close at hand. "Ah,
yes, there is always some trouble mixed up with the greatest pleasure,"
said the mouse-king; but he gave orders that all the mice within a
circle of many miles should be invited at once. They were to assemble in
the kitchen, and the three travelled mice were to stand in a row before
them, while a sausage skewer, covered with crape, was to be stuck up
instead of the missing mouse. No one dared to express an opinion until
the king spoke, and desired one of them to go on with her story. And now
we shall hear what she said.

What the first little mouse saw and heard on her travels

"When I first went out into the world," said the little mouse, "I
fancied, as so many of my age do, that I already knew everything, but it
was not so. It takes years to acquire great knowledge. I went at once to
sea in a ship bound for the north. I had been told that the ship's cook
must know how to prepare every dish at sea, and it is easy enough to do
that with plenty of sides of bacon, and large tubs of salt meat and
mouldy flour. There I found plenty of delicate food, but no opportunity
for learning how to make soup from a sausage skewer. We sailed on for
many days and nights; the ship rocked fearfully, and we did not escape
without a wetting. As soon as we arrived at the port to which the ship
was bound, I left it, and went on shore at a place far towards the
north. It is a wonderful thing to leave your own little corner at home,
to hide yourself in a ship where there are sure to be some nice snug
corners for shelter, then suddenly to find yourself thousands of miles
away in a foreign land. I saw large pathless forests of pine and birch
trees, which smelt so strong that I sneezed and thought of sausage.
There were great lakes also which looked as black as ink at a distance,
but were quite clear when I came close to them. Large swans were
floating upon them, and I thought at first they were only foam, they lay
so still; but when I saw them walk and fly, I knew what they were
directly. They belong to the goose species, one can see that by their
walk. No one can attempt to disguise family descent. I kept with my own
kind, and associated with the forest and field mice, who, however, knew
very little, especially about what I wanted to know, and which had
actually made me travel abroad. The idea that soup could be made from a
sausage skewer was to them such an out-of-the-way, unlikely thought,
that it was repeated from one to another through the whole forest. They
declared that the problem would never be solved, that the thing was an
impossibility. How little I thought that in this place, on the very
first night, I should be initiated into the manner of its preparation."

"It was the height of summer, which the mice told me was the reason
that the forest smelt so strong, and that the herbs were so fragrant,
and the lakes with the white swimming swans so dark, and yet so clear.
On the margin of the wood, near to three or four houses, a pole, as
large as the mainmast of a ship, had been erected, and from the summit
hung wreaths of flowers and fluttering ribbons; it was the Maypole. Lads
and lasses danced round the pole, and tried to outdo the violins of the
musicians with their singing. They were as merry as ever at sunset and
in the moonlight, but I took no part in the merry-making. What has a
little mouse to do with a Maypole dance? I sat in the soft moss, and
held my sausage skewer tight. The moon threw its beams particularly on
one spot where stood a tree covered with exceedingly fine moss. I may
almost venture to say that it was as fine and soft as the fur of the
mouse-king, but it was green, which is a color very agreeable to the
eye. All at once I saw the most charming little people marching towards
me. They did not reach higher than my knee; they looked like human
beings, but were better proportioned, and they called themselves elves.
Their clothes were very delicate and fine, for they were made of the
leaves of flowers, trimmed with the wings of flies and gnats, which had
not a bad effect. By their manner, it appeared as if they were seeking
for something. I knew not what, till at last one of them espied me and
came towards me, and the foremost pointed to my sausage skewer, and
said, 'There, that is just what we want; see, it is pointed at the top;
is it not capital?' and the longer he looked at my pilgrim's staff,
the more delighted he became. 'I will lend it to you,' said I, 'but
not to keep.'"

"'Oh no, we won't keep it!' they all cried; and then they seized the
skewer, which I gave up to them, and danced with it to the spot where
the delicate moss grew, and set it up in the middle of the green. They
wanted a maypole, and the one they now had seemed cut out on purpose for
them. Then they decorated it so beautifully that it was quite dazzling
to look at. Little spiders spun golden threads around it, and then it
was hung with fluttering veils and flags so delicately white that they
glittered like snow in the moonshine. After that they took colors from
the butterfly's wing, and sprinkled them over the white drapery, which
gleamed as if covered with flowers and diamonds, so that I could not
recognize my sausage skewer at all. Such a maypole had never been seen
in all the world as this. Then came a great company of real elves.
Nothing could be finer than their clothes, and they invited me to be
present at the feast; but I was to keep at a certain distance, because I
was too large for them. Then commenced such music that it sounded like a
thousand glass bells, and was so full and strong that I thought it must
be the song of the swans. I fancied also that I heard the voices of the
cuckoo and the black-bird, and it seemed at last as if the whole forest
sent forth glorious melodies-- the voices of children, the tinkling of
bells, and the songs of the birds; and all this wonderful melody came
from the elfin maypole. My sausage peg was a complete peal of bells. I
could scarcely believe that so much could have been produced from it,
till I remembered into what hands it had fallen. I was so much affected
that I wept tears such as a little mouse can weep, but they were tears
of joy. The night was far too short for me; there are no long nights
there in summer, as we often have in this part of the world. When the
morning dawned, and the gentle breeze rippled the glassy mirror of the
forest lake, all the delicate veils and flags fluttered away into thin
air; the waving garlands of the spider's web, the hanging bridges and
galleries, or whatever else they may be called, vanished away as if they
had never been. Six elves brought me back my sausage skewer, and at the
same time asked me to make any request, which they would grant if in
their power; so I begged them, if they could, to tell me how to make
soup from a sausage skewer."

"'How do we make it?' said the chief of the elves with a smile. 'Why
you have just seen it; you scarcely knew your sausage skewer again, I am
sure.'"

"They think themselves very wise, thought I to myself. Then I told them
all about it, and why I had travelled so far, and also what promise had
been made at home to the one who should discover the method of preparing
this soup. 'What use will it be,' I asked, 'to the mouse-king or to
our whole mighty kingdom that I have seen all these beautiful things? I
cannot shake the sausage peg and say, Look, here is the skewer, and now
the soup will come. That would only produce a dish to be served when
people were keeping a fast.'"

"Then the elf dipped his finger into the cup of a violet, and said to
me, 'Look here, I will anoint your pilgrim's staff, so that when you
return to your own home and enter the king's castle, you have only to
touch the king with your staff, and violets will spring forth and cover
the whole of it, even in the coldest winter time; so I think I have
given you really something to carry home, and a little more than
something.'"

But before the little mouse explained what this something more was, she
stretched her staff out to the king, and as it touched him the most
beautiful bunch of violets sprang forth and filled the place with
perfume. The smell was so powerful that the mouse-king ordered the mice
who stood nearest the chimney to thrust their tails into the fire, that
there might be a smell of burning, for the perfume of the violets was
overpowering, and not the sort of scent that every one liked.

"But what was the something more of which you spoke just now?" asked
the mouse-king.

"Why," answered the little mouse, "I think it is what they call
'effect;'" and thereupon she turned the staff round, and behold not a
single flower was to be seen upon it! She now only held the naked
skewer, and lifted it up as a conductor lifts his baton at a concert.
"Violets, the elf told me," continued the mouse, "are for the sight,
the smell, and the touch; so we have only now to produce the effect of
hearing and tasting;" and then, as the little mouse beat time with her
staff, there came sounds of music, not such music as was heard in the
forest, at the elfin feast, but such as is often heard in the kitchen--
the sounds of boiling and roasting. It came quite suddenly, like wind
rushing through the chimneys, and seemed as if every pot and kettle were
boiling over. The fire-shovel clattered down on the brass fender; and
then, quite as suddenly, all was still,-- nothing could be heard but the
light, vapory song of the tea-kettle, which was quite wonderful to hear,
for no one could rightly distinguish whether the kettle was just
beginning to boil or going to stop. And the little pot steamed, and the
great pot simmered, but without any regard for each; indeed there seemed
no sense in the pots at all. And as the little mouse waved her baton
still more wildly, the pots foamed and threw up bubbles, and boiled
over; while again the wind roared and whistled through the chimney, and
at last there was such a terrible hubbub, that the little mouse let her
stick fall.

"That is a strange sort of soup," said the mouse-king; "shall we not
now hear about the preparation?"

"That is all," answered the little mouse, with a bow.

"That all!" said the mouse-king; "then we shall be glad to hear what
information the next may have to give us."

What the second mouse had to tell

"I was born in the library, at a castle," said the second mouse.
"Very few members of our family ever had the good fortune to get into
the dining-room, much less the store-room. On my journey, and here
to-day, are the only times I have ever seen a kitchen. We were often
obliged to suffer hunger in the library, but then we gained a great deal
of knowledge. The rumor reached us of the royal prize offered to those
who should be able to make soup from a sausage skewer. Then my old
grandmother sought out a manuscript which, however, she could not read,
but had heard it read, and in it was written, 'Those who are poets can
make soup of sausage skewers.' She then asked me if I was a poet. I
felt myself quite innocent of any such pretensions. Then she said I must
go out and make myself a poet. I asked again what I should be required
to do, for it seemed to me quite as difficult as to find out how to make
soup of a sausage skewer. My grandmother had heard a great deal of
reading in her day, and she told me three principal qualifications were
necessary-- understanding, imagination, and feeling. 'If you can manage
to acquire these three, you will be a poet, and the sausage-skewer soup
will be quite easy to you.'"

"So I went forth into the world, and turned my steps towards the west,
that I might become a poet. Understanding is the most important matter
in everything. I knew that, for the two other qualifications are not
thought much of; so I went first to seek for understanding. Where was I
to find it? 'Go to the ant and learn wisdom,' said the great Jewish
king. I knew that from living in a library. So I went straight on till I
came to the first great ant-hill, and then I set myself to watch, that I
might become wise. The ants are a very respectable people, they are
wisdom itself. All they do is like the working of a sum in arithmetic,
which comes right. 'To work and to lay eggs,' say they, 'and to
provide for posterity, is to live out your time properly;' and that
they truly do. They are divided into the clean and the dirty ants, their
rank is pointed out by a number, and the ant-queen is number ONE; and
her opinion is the only correct one on everything; she seems to have the
whole wisdom of the world in her, which was just the important matter I
wished to acquire. She said a great deal which was no doubt very clever;
yet to me it sounded like nonsense. She said the ant-hill was the
loftiest thing in the world, and yet close to the mound stood a tall
tree, which no one could deny was loftier, much loftier, but no mention
was made of the tree. One evening an ant lost herself on this tree; she
had crept up the stem, not nearly to the top, but higher than any ant
had ever ventured; and when at last she returned home she said that she
had found something in her travels much higher than the ant-hill. The
rest of the ants considered this an insult to the whole community; so
she was condemned to wear a muzzle and to live in perpetual solitude. A
short time afterwards another ant got on the tree, and made the same
journey and the same discovery, but she spoke of it cautiously and
indefinitely, and as she was one of the superior ants and very much
respected, they believed her, and when she died they erected an eggshell
as a monument to her memory, for they cultivated a great respect for
science. I saw," said the little mouse, "that the ants were always
running to and fro with her burdens on their backs. Once I saw one of
them drop her load; she gave herself a great deal of trouble in trying
to raise it again, but she could not succeed. Then two others came up
and tried with all their strength to help her, till they nearly dropped
their own burdens in doing so; then they were obliged to stop for a
moment in their help, for every one must think of himself first. And the
ant-queen remarked that their conduct that day showed that they
possessed kind hearts and good understanding. 'These two qualities,'
she continued, 'place us ants in the highest degree above all other
reasonable beings. Understanding must therefore be seen among us in the
most prominent manner, and my wisdom is greater than all.' And so
saying she raised herself on her two hind legs, that no one else might
be mistaken for her. I could not therefore make an error, so I ate her
up. We are to go to the ants to learn wisdom, and I had got the queen."

"I now turned and went nearer to the lofty tree already mentioned,
which was an oak. It had a tall trunk with a wide-spreading top, and was
very old. I knew that a living being dwelt here, a dryad as she is
called, who is born with the tree and dies with it. I had heard this in
the library, and here was just such a tree, and in it an oak-maiden. She
uttered a terrible scream when she caught sight of me so near to her;
like many women, she was very much afraid of mice. And she had more real
cause for fear than they have, for I might have gnawed through the tree
on which her life depended. I spoke to her in a kind and friendly
manner, and begged her to take courage. At last she took me up in her
delicate hand, and then I told her what had brought me out into the
world, and she promised me that perhaps on that very evening she should
be able to obtain for me one of the two treasures for which I was
seeking. She told me that Phantaesus was her very dear friend, that he
was as beautiful as the god of love, that he remained often for many
hours with her under the leafy boughs of the tree which then rustled and
waved more than ever over them both. He called her his dryad, she said,
and the tree his tree; for the grand old oak, with its gnarled trunk,
was just to his taste. The root, spreading deep into the earth, the top
rising high in the fresh air, knew the value of the drifted snow, the
keen wind, and the warm sunshine, as it ought to be known. 'Yes,'
continued the dryad, 'the birds sing up above in the branches, and talk
to each other about the beautiful fields they have visited in foreign
lands; and on one of the withered boughs a stork has built his nest,--
it is beautifully arranged, and besides it is pleasant to hear a little
about the land of the pyramids. All this pleases Phantaesus, but it is
not enough for him; I am obliged to relate to him of my life in the
woods; and to go back to my childhood, when I was little, and the tree
so small and delicate that a stinging-nettle could overshadow it, and I
have to tell everything that has happened since then till now that the
tree is so large and strong. Sit you down now under the green bindwood
and pay attention, when Phantaesus comes I will find an opportunity to
lay hold of his wing and to pull out one of the little feathers. That
feather you shall have; a better was never given to any poet, it will be
quite enough for you.'"

"And when Phantaesus came the feather was plucked, and," said the
little mouse, "I seized and put it in water, and kept it there till it
was quite soft. It was very heavy and indigestible, but I managed to
nibble it up at last. It is not so easy to nibble one's self into a
poet, there are so many things to get through. Now, however, I had two
of them, understanding and imagination; and through these I knew that
the third was to be found in the library. A great man has said and
written that there are novels whose sole and only use appeared to be
that they might relieve mankind of overflowing tears-- a kind of sponge,
in fact, for sucking up feelings and emotions. I remembered a few of
these books, they had always appeared tempting to the appetite; they had
been much read, and were so greasy, that they must have absorbed no end
of emotions in themselves. I retraced my steps to the library, and
literally devoured a whole novel, that is, properly speaking, the
interior or soft part of it; the crust, or binding, I left. When I had
digested not only this, but a second, I felt a stirring within me; then
I ate a small piece of a third romance, and felt myself a poet. I said
it to myself, and told others the same. I had head-ache and back-ache,
and I cannot tell what aches besides. I thought over all the stories
that may be said to be connected with sausage pegs, and all that has
ever been written about skewers, and sticks, and staves, and splinters
came to my thoughts; the ant-queen must have had a wonderfully clear
understanding. I remembered the man who placed a white stick in his
mouth by which he could make himself and the stick invisible. I thought
of sticks as hobby-horses, staves of music or rhyme, of breaking a stick
over a man's back, and heaven knows how many more phrases of the same
sort relating to sticks, staves, and skewers. All my thoughts rein on
skewers, sticks of wood, and staves; and as I am, at last, a poet, and I
have worked terribly hard to make myself one, I can of course make
poetry on anything. I shall therefore be able to wait upon you every day
in the week with a poetical history of a skewer. And that is my soup."

"In that case," said the mouse-king, "we will hear what the third
mouse has to say."

"Squeak, squeak," cried a little mouse at the kitchen door; it was the
fourth, and not the third, of the four who were contending for the
prize, one whom the rest supposed to be dead. She shot in like an arrow,
and overturned the sausage peg that had been covered with crape. She had
been running day and night. She had watched an opportunity to get into a
goods train, and had travelled by the railway; and yet she had arrived
almost too late. She pressed forward, looking very much ruffled. She had
lost her sausage skewer, but not her voice; for she began to speak at
once as if they only waited for her, and would hear her only, and as if
nothing else in the world was of the least consequence. She spoke out so
clearly and plainly, and she had come in so suddenly, that no one had
time to stop her or to say a word while she was speaking. And now let us
hear what she said.

What the fourth mouse, who spoke before the third, had to tell

"I started off at once to the largest town," said she, "but the name
of it has escaped me. I have a very bad memory for names. I was carried
from the railway, with some forfeited goods, to the jail, and on
arriving I made my escape, and ran into the house of the turnkey. The
turnkey was speaking of his prisoners, especially of one who had uttered
thoughtless words. These words had given rise to other words, and at
length they were written down and registered: 'The whole affair is like
making soup of sausage skewers,' said he, 'but the soup may cost him
his neck.'"

"Now this raised in me an interest for the prisoner," continued the
little mouse, "and I watched my opportunity, and slipped into his
apartment, for there is a mouse-hole to be found behind every closed
door. The prisoner looked pale; he had a great beard and large,
sparkling eyes. There was a lamp burning, but the walls were so black
that they only looked the blacker for it. The prisoner scratched
pictures and verses with white chalk on the black walls, but I did not
read the verses. I think he found his confinement wearisome, so that I
was a welcome guest. He enticed me with bread-crumbs, with whistling,
and with gentle words, and seemed so friendly towards me, that by
degrees I gained confidence in him, and we became friends; he divided
his bread and water with me, gave me cheese and sausage, and I really
began to love him. Altogether, I must own that it was a very pleasant
intimacy. He let me run about on his hand, and on his arm, and into his
sleeve; and I even crept into his beard, and he called me his little
friend. I forgot what I had come out into the world for; forgot my
sausage skewer which I had laid in a crack in the floor-- it is lying
there still. I wished to stay with him always where I was, for I knew
that if I went away the poor prisoner would have no one to be his
friend, which is a sad thing. I stayed, but he did not. He spoke to me
so mournfully for the last time, gave me double as much bread and cheese
as usual, and kissed his hand to me. Then he went away, and never came
back. I know nothing more of his history."

"The jailer took possession of me now. He said something about soup
from a sausage skewer, but I could not trust him. He took me in his hand
certainly, but it was to place me in a cage like a tread-mill. Oh how
dreadful it was! I had to run round and round without getting any
farther in advance, and only to make everybody laugh. The jailer's
grand-daughter was a charming little thing. She had curly hair like the
brightest gold, merry eyes, and such a smiling mouth."

"'You poor little mouse,' said she, one day as she peeped into my
cage, 'I will set you free.' She then drew forth the iron fastening,
and I sprang out on the window-sill, and from thence to the roof. Free!
free! that was all I could think of; not of the object of my journey. It
grew dark, and as night was coming on I found a lodging in an old tower,
where dwelt a watchman and an owl. I had no confidence in either of
them, least of all in the owl, which is like a cat, and has a great
failing, for she eats mice. One may however be mistaken sometimes; and
so was I, for this was a respectable and well-educated old owl, who knew
more than the watchman, and even as much as I did myself. The young owls
made a great fuss about everything, but the only rough words she would
say to them were, 'You had better go and make some soup from sausage
skewers.' She was very indulgent and loving to her children. Her
conduct gave me such confidence in her, that from the crack where I sat
I called out 'squeak.' This confidence of mine pleased her so much
that she assured me she would take me under her own protection, and that
not a creature should do me harm. The fact was, she wickedly meant to
keep me in reserve for her own eating in winter, when food would be
scarce. Yet she was a very clever lady-owl; she explained to me that the
watchman could only hoot with the horn that hung loose at his side; and
then she said he is so terribly proud of it, that he imagines himself an
owl in the tower;-- wants to do great things, but only succeeds in
small; all soup on a sausage skewer. Then I begged the owl to give me
the recipe for this soup. 'Soup from a sausage skewer,' said she, 'is
only a proverb amongst mankind, and may be understood in many ways. Each
believes his own way the best, and after all, the proverb signifies
nothing.' 'Nothing!' I exclaimed. I was quite struck. Truth is not
always agreeable, but truth is above everything else, as the old owl
said. I thought over all this, and saw quite plainly that if truth was
really so far above everything else, it must be much more valuable than
soup from a sausage skewer. So I hastened to get away, that I might be
home in time, and bring what was highest and best, and above
everything-- namely, the truth. The mice are an enlightened people, and
the mouse-king is above them all. He is therefore capable of making me
queen for the sake of truth."

"Your truth is a falsehood," said the mouse who had not yet spoken;
"I can prepare the soup, and I mean to do so."

How it was prepared

"I did not travel," said the third mouse; "I stayed in this country:
that was the right way. One gains nothing by travelling-- everything can
be acquired here quite as easily; so I stayed at home. I have not
obtained what I know from supernatural beings. I have neither swallowed
it, nor learnt it from conversing with owls. I have got it all from my
reflections and thoughts. Will you now set the kettle on the fire-- so?
Now pour the water in-- quite full-- up to the brim; place it on the
fire; make up a good blaze; keep it burning, that the water may boil; it
must boil over and over. There, now I throw in the skewer. Will the
mouse-king be pleased now to dip his tail into the boiling water, and
stir it round with the tail. The longer the king stirs it, the stronger
the soup will become. Nothing more is necessary, only to stir it."

"Can no one else do this?" asked the king.

"No," said the mouse; "only in the tail of the mouse-king is this
power contained."

And the water boiled and bubbled, as the mouse-king stood close beside
the kettle. It seemed rather a dangerous performance; but he turned
round, and put out his tail, as mice do in a dairy, when they wish to
skim the cream from a pan of milk with their tails and afterwards lick
it off. But the mouse-king's tail had only just touched the hot steam,
when he sprang away from the chimney in a great hurry, exclaiming, "Oh,
certainly, by all means, you must be my queen; and we will let the soup
question rest till our golden wedding, fifty years hence; so that the
poor in my kingdom, who are then to have plenty of food, will have
something to look forward to for a long time, with great joy."

And very soon the wedding took place. But many of the mice, as they were
returning home, said that the soup could not be properly called "soup
from a sausage skewer," but "soup from a mouse's tail." They
acknowledged also that some of the stories were very well told; but that
the whole could have been managed differently. "I should have told it
so-- and so-- and so." These were the critics who are always so clever
afterwards.

When this story was circulated all over the world, the opinions upon it
were divided; but the story remained the same. And, after all, the best
way in everything you undertake, great as well as small, is to expect no
thanks for anything you may do, even when it refers to "soup from a
sausage skewer."
