# author: Hans Christian Andersen
# source: Hans Christian Andersen (1949), The Complete Andersen: All of the 168 Stories by Hans Christian Andersen, Heritage Press
# url: https://www.andersenstories.com/en//andersen_fairy-tales/the_bond_of_friendship
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The bond of friendship 

We've recently made a little journey, and already we want to make a
longer one. Where? To Sparta, or Mycenae, or Delphi? There are hundreds
of places whose names make the heart pound with the love of travel. On
horseback we climb mountain paths, through shrubs and brush. A single
traveler looks like a whole caravan. He rides in front with his guide; a
pack horse carries luggage, tent, and provisions; a couple of soldiers
guard the rear for his protection. No inn with soft beds awaits him at
the end of a tiring day's journey; often the tent is his roof in
nature's great wilderness, and the guide cooks him his supper-a pilau
of rice, fowl, and curry. Thousands of gnats swarm around the little
tent. It is a miserable night, and tomorrow the route will head across
swollen streams. Sit tight on your horse lest you are washed away!

What reward is there for these hardships? The greatest! The richest!
Nature reveals herself here in all her glory; every spot is history; eye
and mind alike are delighted. The poet can sing of it, the painter
portray it in splendid pictures; but neither can reproduce the air of
reality that sinks deep into the soul of the spectator, and remains
there.

The lonely herdsman up on the hills could, perhaps, by the simple story
of an event in his life, open your eyes, and with a few words let you
behold the land of the Hellenes better than any travel book could do.
Let him speak, then! About a custom, a beautiful, peculiar custom. The
shepherd in the mountains will tell about it. He calls it the bond of
friendship, and relates:

Our house was built of clay, but the doorposts were fluted marble
pillars found on the spot where the house was built. The roof almost
reached the ground. Now it was black-brown and ugly; but when it was new
it was covered with blooming oleander and fresh laurel branches fetched
from beyond the mountains. The walks around our house were narrow. Walls
of rock rose steeply up, bare and black in color. On top of them, clouds
often hung like white living beings. I never heard a bird sing here, and
never did the men dance here to the sound of the bagpipe; but the place
was sacred from olden times. Its very name reminded of that, for it was
called Delphi. The dark, solemn mountains were all covered with snow.
The brightest, which gleamed in the red evening sun the longest, was
Parnassus. The brook close by our house rushed down from it, and was
also sacred, long ago. Now the donkey makes it muddy with its feet, but
the current rolls on and becomes clear again.

How well I remember every spot and its deep sacred solitude!

In the middle of the hut a fire was lit, and when the hot ashes lay high
and glowing, the bread was baked in it. If the snow was piled up high
round our hut and almost covered it, then my mother seemed to be her
brightest. She would hold my head between her hands, kiss my forehead,
and sing the songs she never sang at other times, for our masters, the
Turks, did not like them. And she sang: "On the summit of Olympus, in
the fir tree forest lived an old stag; its eyes were heavy with tears.
It wept red, yes, and even green and light-blue tears. Then a roebuck
came by and said, 'What ails you, that you cry so, that you weep red,
green, yes, even light-blue, tears?' The stag replied, 'The Turk has
entered our city. He has fierce dogs for the hunt, a goodly pack.' I
will drive them away across the islands,' said the young roebuck. 'I
will drive them away across the islands into the deep sea!' But before
evening the roebuck was slain, and before nightfall the stag was hunted
and killed."

When my mother sang this her eyes became moist, and a tear hung on the
long lashes. But she concealed it, and turned our black bread in the
ashes. Then I would clench my fists and say, "We'll kill the Turks!"

But she repeated the words of the song, " 'I will drive them across
the islands into the deep sea!' But before evening the roebuck was
slain, and before nightfall the stag was hunted and killed."

For several days and nights we had been alone in our hut, and then my
father came home. I knew he would bring me sea shells from the Gulf of
Lepanto, or maybe even a sharp gleaming knife. But this time he brought
us a child, a naked little girl whom he had carried under his sheepskin
coat. She was wrapped in a fur, but when this was taken off and she lay
in my mother's lap all that she possessed was three silver coins
fastened in her dark hair. And father explained to us that the Turks had
killed her parents, and told us so much about it that I dreamed about it
all night. Father himself had been wounded, and my mother dressed his
arm. His wound was deep, and the thick sheepskin was stiff with blood.

The little girl was to be my sister! She was so beautiful, with clear,
shining eyes; even my mother's eyes were not gentler than hers. Yes,
Anastasia, as they called her, was to be my sister, for her father was
united to mine, united in accordance with an old custom we still keep.
They had sworn brotherhood in their youth, and had chosen the most
beautiful and virtuous girl in the whole country to consecrate their
bond of friendship. I had often heard of the queer and beautiful custom.

So now the little girl was my sister. She sat in my lap; I brought her
flowers and feathers of the field birds. We drank together of the waters
of Parnassus and slept head to head beneath the laurel roof of the hut,
while many a winter my mother sang of the red, the green, and the
light-blue tears. But still I didn't understand it was my own
countrymen whose thousandfold sorrows were reflected in those tears.

One day, three Frankish men came, dressed differently than we were. They
had their tents and beds packed on horses; and more than twenty Turks,
armed with swords and muskets, accompanied them, for they were friends
of the pasha, and carried letters from him. They only came to view our
mountains, to climb Parnassus through snow and clouds, and to see the
strange, steep black rocks surrounding our hut. There was no room for
them inside our home, nor could they stand the smoke rolling along the
ceiling and out at the low door; so they pitched their tents in the
narrow clearing outside our house, roasted lambs and birds, and drank
strong, sweet wine, which the Turks did not dare to drink.

When they left, I went with them for some distance, and my little sister
hung in a goatskin on my back. One of the Frankish gentlemen had me
stand before a rock, and sketched me and her, so lifelike as we stood
there, so that we looked like one being-I had never thought of it
before, but Anastasia and I were really one person. She was always
sitting in my lap or hanging on my back in the goatskin, and when I
dreamed she appeared in my dreams.

Two nights later other men came to our hut, armed with knives and
muskets. They were Albanians, brave men, said my mother. They stayed
only a short while, wrapping tobacco in strips of paper and smoking it.
My sister Anastasia sat on the knees of one of them, and when he was
gone she had only two silver coins in her hair instead of three. The
oldest of the men talked about which route they should take; he was not
sure.

"If I spit upward," he said, "it will fall in my face; if I spit
downward, it will fall in my beard!"

But they had to make a choice, so they went, and my father followed
them. And soon afterwards we heard the sound of shots! The firing
increased; then soldiers rushed into our hut and took my mother, myself,
and Anastasia prisoners. The robbers, they said, had stayed with us, and
my father had gone with them; therefore we had to be taken away. Soon I
saw the robbers' corpses, and I saw my father's corpse too, and I
cried myself to sleep. When I awoke we were in prison, but the cell was
no worse than the room in our hut. And they gave me onions to eat and
musty wine poured from a tarred sack, but ours at home was no better.

I don't know how long we were held prisoners, but many days and nights
went by. It was our holy Eastertime when we were released. I carried
Anastasia on my back, for my mother was ill and could only walk slowly,
and it was a long way down to the sea, to the Gulf of Lepanto. We
entered a church magnificent with pictures on a golden background. They
were pictures of angels, oh, so beautiful! but I thought our little
Anastasia was just as beautiful. In the center of the floor was a coffin
filled with roses. "The Lord Christ is symbolized there as a beautiful
rose," said my mother; and then the priest chanted, "Christ is
risen!" Everybody kissed each other. All the people had lighted tapers
in their hands; I received one, and so did little Anastasia. The
bagpipes played, men danced hand in hand from the church, and the women
outside were roasting the Easter lamb. We were invited to share it, and
when I sat by the fire a boy older than I put his arms around my neck,
kissed me, and cried, "Christ is risen!" Thus we met for the first
time, Aphtanides and I.

My mother could make fishing nets, which gave her a good income here in
the bay, so for a long time we lived beside the sea-the beautiful sea
that tasted like tears, and whose colors reminded me of the song of the
weeping stag, for its waters were sometimes red, sometimes green, and
then again light-blue.

Aphtanides knew how to guide a boat, and I often sat in it with
Anastasia while it glided through the water, like a cloud over the sky.
Then, as the sun set and the mountains turned a deeper and deeper blue,
one range seemed to rise behind the other, and behind all of them was
Parnassus, covered with snow. Its summit gleamed in the evening rays
like glowing iron, and it seemed as though the light shone from within
it; for long after the sun had set the mountaintop still glittered in
the clear, blue shimmering air. The white sea birds touched the water's
surface with their wings, and indeed everything here was as calm as
among the black rocks at Delphi.

I was lying on my back in the boat while Anastasia leaned against my
chest, and the stars above shone more brightly than our church lamps.
They were the same stars, and they were in exactly the same position
above me, as when I had sat outside our hut at Delphi, and at last I
imagined I was still there. Then there was a splash in the water, and
the boat rocked violently! I cried out loud, for Anastasia had fallen
overboard, but just as quickly Aphtanides had leaped in after her, and
soon he lifted her up to me. We undressed her, wrung the water out of
her clothes; and then dressed her again. Aphtanides did the same for
himself. We remained on the water until their clothes were dry; and no
one knew about our fright over the little adopted sister in whose life
Aphtanides also now had a part.

Then it was summer! The sun blazed so fiercely that the leaves on the
trees withered. I thought of our cool mountains and their fresh-water
streams, and my mother longed for them too; so one evening we journeyed
home. How quiet it was and how peaceful! We walked on through the high
thyme, still fragrant though the sun had dried its leaves. Not a
shepherd did we meet; not a single hut did we pass. Everything was quiet
and deserted; only a shooting star told us that in heaven there still
was life. I do not know if the clear blue air glowed with its own light,
or if the rays came from the stars, but we could plainly make out the
outlines of the mountains. My mother lit a fire and roasted the onions
she had brought with her; then my sister and I slept among the thyme,
with no fear of the wolf or the jackal, not to mention fear of the ugly,
fire-breathing smidraki, for my mother sat beside us, and this I
believed was enough.

When we reached our old home we found the hut a heap of ruins, and had
to build a new one. A couple of women helped my mother, and in a few
days the walls were raised and covered with a new roof of oleander. My
mother braided many bottle holsters of bark and skins; I tended the
priests' little flock, and Anastasia and the little tortoises were my
playmates.

One day we had a visit from our dear Aphtanides, who said how much he
had longed to see us; he stayed with us for two whole days.

A month later he came again, to tell us he was taking a ship for Corfu
and Patras but had to bid us good-by first; he had brought our mother a
large fish. He talked a great deal, not only about the fishermen out in
the Gulf of Lepanto, but also of the kings and heroes who had once ruled
Greece, just as the Turks rule it now.

I have seen a bud on a rosebush develop through the days and weeks into
a full, blooming flower before I was even aware how large, beautiful,
and blushing it had become; and now I saw the same thing in Anastasia.
She was now a beautiful, fullgrown girl, and I was a strong youth. I
myself had taken from the wolves that fell before my musket the skins
that covered my mother's and Anastasia's beds. Years had passed.

Then one evening Aphtanides returned, strong, brown, and slender as a
reed. He kissed us all, and had many stories to tell of the great ocean,
the fortifications of Malta, and the strange tombs of Egypt. It all
sounded wonderful, like a priestly legend, and I looked at him with a
kind of awe.

"How much you know!" I said. "How well you can tell about it!"

"But after all, you once told me about the most wonderful thing," he
said. "You told me something that has never been out of my thoughts-the
grand old custom of the bond of friendship, a custom I want very much to
follow. Brother, let us go to church, as your and Anastasia's fathers
did before us. Your sister is the most beautiful and innocent of girls;
she shall consecrate us! No nation has such beautiful old customs as we
Greeks."

Anastasia blushed like a fresh rose, and my mother kissed Aphtanides.

An hour's walk from our house, where loose earth lies on the rocks, and
a few scattered trees give shade, stood the little church, a silver lamp
hanging before its altar.

I wore my best clothes. The white fustanella fell in rich folds over my
hips, the red jacket fitted tight and snug, the tassel on my fez was
silver, and in my girdle gleamed my knife and pistols. Aphtanides wore
the blue costume of the Greek sailors; on his chest hung a silver
medallion with a figure of the Virgin Mary, and his scarf was as costly
as those worn by rich men. Everyone could see that we two were going to
some ceremony.

We entered the little empty church, where the evening sunlight,
streaming through the door, gleamed on the burning lamp and the colored
pictures on the golden background. We knelt on the altar steps, and
Anastasia stood before us. A long white garment hung loosely and lightly
over her graceful figure; on her white neck and bosom a chain of old and
new coins formed a large collar. Her black hair was fastened in a single
knot and held together by a small cap fashioned of gold and silver coins
that had been found in the old temples. No Greek girl had more beautiful
ornaments than she. Her face beamed, and her eyes were bright as two
stars.

The three of us prayed silently, and then she asked us, "Will you be
friends in life and in death?"

"Yes," we replied.

"Will each of you, whatever may happen, remember: my brother is a part
of me! My secrets are his secrets; my happiness is his happiness!
Self-sacrifice, patience, every virtue in me, belongs to him as well as
to me!"

Then she placed our hands together and kissed each of us on the
forehead, and again we prayed silently. Then the priest came through the
door behind the altar and blessed the three of us; the singing voices of
other holy men sounded from behind the altar screen. The bond of eternal
friendship was completed. When we arose I saw that my mother standing by
the church door was weeping tenderly.

How cheerful it was now in our little hut by the springs of Delphi! The
evening before his departure Aphtanides sat with me on the mountainside,
his arm around my waist, mine around his neck. We spoke of the suffering
of Greece, and of the men the country could trust. Every thought of our
souls was clear to each of us, and I took his hand. "One thing more you
must know, one thing that till this moment only God and I have known! My
whole soul is filled with a love-a love stronger than the love I feel
for my mother and for you!"

"And whom do you love?" asked Aphtanides, his face and neck turning
red.

"I love Anastasia," I said-and then his hand trembled in mine, and he
turned pale as a corpse. I saw it and understood, and I also believe my
hand trembled. I bent toward him, kissed his brow, and whispered, "I
have never told her this. Maybe she doesn't love me. Consider this,
brother. I've seen her daily; she has grown up by my side, grown into
my soul!"

"And she shall be yours!" he said. "Yours! I cannot lie to you, nor
will I. I love her too, but tomorrow I go. In a year we shall meet
again, and then you will be married, won't you? I have some money of my
own; it is yours. You must, and shall, take it!"

Silently we wandered across the mountain. It was late in the evening
when we stood at my mother's door. She was not there, but as we entered
Anastasia held the lamp up, gazing at Aphtanides with a sad and
beautiful look. "Tomorrow you're leaving us," she said. "How it
saddens me!"

"Saddens you?" he said, and I thought that in his voice there was a
grief as great as my own. I couldn't speak, but he took her hand and
said, "Our brother there loves you; is he dear to you? His silence is
the best proof of his love."

Anastasia trembled and burst into tears. Then I could see no one but
her, think of no one but her; I threw my arms around her and said,
"Yes, I love you!" She pressed her lips to mine, and her arms slipped
around my neck; the lamp had fallen to the ground, and all about us was
dark-dark as in the heart of poor dear Aphtenides.

Before daybreak he got up, kissed us all good-by, and departed. He had
given my mother all his money for us. Anastasia was my betrothed, and a
few days later she became my wife.
