# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/clever_else
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Clever Else 

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Else, and
when she was grown up, her father said she must be married, and her
mother said, "Yes, if we could only find some one that would consent to
have." At last one came from a distance, and his name was Hans, and
when he proposed to her, he made it a condition that Clever Else should
be very careful as well. "Oh," said the father, "she does not want
for brains." - "No, indeed," said the mother, "she can see the wind
coming up the street and hear the flies cough." - "Well," said Hans,
"if she does not turn out to be careful too, I will not have her." Now
when they were all seated at table, and had well eaten, the mother said,
"Else, go into the cellar and draw some beer." Then Clever Else took
down the jug from the hook in the wall, and as she was on her way to the
cellar she rattled the lid up and down so as to pass away the time. When
she got there, she took a stool and stood it in front of the cask, so
that she need not stoop and make her back ache with needless trouble.
Then she put the jug under the tap and turned it, and while the beer was
running, in order that her eyes should not be idle, she glanced hither
and thither, and finally caught sight of a pickaxe that the workmen had
left sticking in the ceiling just above her head. Then Clever Else began
to cry, for she thought, "If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it
grows big, and we send it into the cellar to draw beer, that pickaxe
might fall on his head and kill him." So there she sat and cried with
all her might, lamenting the anticipated misfortune. All the while they
were waiting upstairs for something to drink, and they waited in vain.
At last the mistress said to the maid, "Go down to the cellar and see
why Else does not come." So the maid went, and found her sitting in
front of the cask crying with all her might. "What are you crying
for?" said the maid. "Oh dear me," answered she, "how can I help
crying? if I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, and we
send it here to draw beer, perhaps the pickaxe may fall on its head and
kill it." - "Our Else is clever indeed!" said the maid, and directly
sat down to bewail the anticipated misfortune. After a while, when the
people upstairs found that the maid did not return, and they were
becoming more and more thirsty, the master said to the boy, "You go
down into the cellar, and see what Else and the maid are doing." The
boy did so, and there he found both Clever Else and the maid sitting
crying together. Then he asked what was the matter. "Oh dear me," said
Else, "how can we help crying? If I marry Hans, and we have a child,
and it grows big, and we send it here to draw beer, the pickaxe might
fall on its head and kill it." - "Our Else is clever indeed!" said
the boy, and sitting down beside her, he began howling with a good will.
Upstairs they were all waiting for him to come back, but as he did not
come, the master said to the mistress, "You go down to the cellar and
see what Else is doing." So the mistress went down and found all three
in great lamentations, and when she asked the cause, then Else told her
how the future possible child might be killed as soon as it was big
enough to be sent to draw beer, by the pickaxe falling on it. Then the
mother at once exclaimed, "Our Else is clever indeed!" and, sitting
down, she wept with the rest. Upstairs the husband waited a little
while, but as his wife did not return, and as his thirst constantly
increased, he said, "I must go down to the cellar myself, and see what
has become of Else." And when he came into the cellar, and found them
all sitting and weeping together, he was told that it was all owing to
the child that Else might possibly have, and the possibility of its
being killed by the pickaxe so happening to fall just at the time the
child might be sitting underneath it drawing beer; and when he heard all
this, he cried, "How clever is our Else!" and sitting down, he joined
his tears to theirs. The intended bridegroom stayed upstairs by himself
a long time, but as nobody came back to him, he thought he would go
himself and see what they were all about And there he found all five
lamenting and crying most pitifully, each one louder than the other.
"What misfortune has happened?" cried he. "O my dear Hans," said
Else, "if we marry and have a child, and it grows big, and we send it
down here to draw beer, perhaps that pickaxe which has been left
sticking up there might fall down on the child's head and kill it; and
how can we help crying at that!" - "Now," said Hans, "I cannot think
that greater sense than that could be wanted in my household; so as you
are so clever, Else, I will have you for my wife," and taking her by
the hand he led her upstairs, and they had the wedding at once.

A little while after they were married, Hans said to his wife, "I am
going out to work, in order to get money; you go into the field and cut
the corn, so that we may have bread." - "Very well, I will do so, dear
Hans," said she. And after Hans was gone she cooked herself some nice
stew, and took it with her into the field. And when she got there, she
said to herself, "Now, what shall I do? shall I reap first, or eat
first? All right, I will eat first." Then she ate her fill of stew, and
when she could eat no more, she said to herself, "Now, what shall I do?
shall I reap first, or sleep first? All right, I will sleep first."
Then she lay down in the corn and went to sleep. And Hans got home, and
waited there a long while, and Else did not come, so he said to himself,
"My clever Else is so industrious that she never thinks of coming home
and eating." But when evening drew near and still she did not come,
Hans set out to see how much corn she had cut; but she had cut no corn
at all, but there she was lying in it asleep. Then Hans made haste home,
and fetched a bird-net with little bells and threw it over her; and
still she went on sleeping. And he ran home again and locked himself in,
and sat him down on his bench to work. At last, when it was beginning to
grow dark, Clever Else woke, and when she got up and shook herself, the
bells jingled at each movement that she made. Then she grew frightened,
and began to doubt whether she were really Clever Else or not, and said
to herself, "Am I, or am I not?" And, not knowing what answer to make,
she stood for a long while considering; at last she thought, "I will go
home to Hans and ask him if I am I or not; he is sure to know." So she
ran up to the door of her house, but it was locked; then she knocked at
the window, and cried, "Hans, is Else within?" - "Yes," answered
Hans, "she is in." Then she was in a greater fright than ever, and
crying, "Oh dear, then I am not I," she went to inquire at another
door, but the people hearing the jingling of the bells would not open to
her, and she could get in nowhere. So she ran away beyond the village,
and since then no one has seen her.
