# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/gossip_wolf_and_the_fox
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Gossip wolf and the fox (The fox and his cousin) 

The she-wolf brought forth a young one, and invited the fox to be
godfather. "After all, he is a near relative of ours," said she, "he
has a good understanding, and much talent; he can instruct my little
son, and help him forward in the world." The fox, too, appeared quite
honest, and said, "Worthy Mrs. Gossip, I thank you for the honour which
you are doing me; I will, however, conduct myself in such a way that you
shall be repaid for it." He enjoyed himself at the feast, and made
merry; afterwards he said, "Dear Mrs. Gossip, it is our duty to take
care of the child, it must have good food that it may be strong. I know
a sheep-fold from which we might fetch a nice morsel." The wolf was
pleased with the ditty, and she went out with the fox to the farm-yard.
He pointed out the fold from afar, and said, "You will be able to creep
in there without being seen, and in the meantime I will look about on
the other side to see if I can pick up a chicken." He, however, did not
go there, but sat down at the entrance to the forest, stretched his legs
and rested. The she-wolf crept into the stable. A dog was lying there,
and it made such a noise that the peasants came running out, caught
Gossip Wolf, and poured a strong burning mixture, which had been
prepared for washing, over her skin. At last she escaped, and dragged
herself outside. There lay the fox, who pretended to be full of
complaints, and said, "Ah, dear Mistress Gossip, how ill I have fared,
the peasants have fallen on me, and have broken every limb I have; if
you do not want me to lie where I am and perish, you must carry me
away." The she-wolf herself was only able to go away slowly, but she
was in such concern about the fox that she took him on her back, and
slowly carried him perfectly safe and sound to her house. Then the fox
cried to her, "Farewell, dear Mistress Gossip, may the roasting you
have had do you good," laughed heartily at her, and bounded off.
