# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_frog_king_or_iron_henry
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The frog king or Iron Henry 

In the old times, when it was still of some use to wish for the thing
one wanted, there lived a King whose daughters were all handsome, but
the youngest was so beautiful that the sun himself, who has seen so
much, wondered each time he shone over her because of her beauty. Near
the royal castle there was a great dark wood, and in the wood under an
old linden-tree was a well; and when the day was hot, the King's
daughter used to go forth into the wood and sit by the brink of the cool
well, and if the time seemed long, she would take out a golden ball, and
throw it up and catch it again, and this was her favourite pastime.

Now it happened one day that the golden ball, instead of falling back
into the maiden's little hand which had sent it aloft, dropped to the
ground near the edge of the well and rolled in. The king's daughter
followed it with her eyes as it sank, but the well was deep, so deep
that the bottom could not be seen. Then she began to weep, and she wept
and wept as if she could never be comforted. And in the midst of her
weeping she heard a voice saying to her: "What ails thee, king's
daughter? Thy tears would melt a heart of stone." And when she looked
to see where the voice came from, there was nothing but a frog
stretching his thick ugly head out of the water. "Oh, is it you, old
waddler?" said she, "I weep because my golden ball has fallen into the
well." - "Never mind, do not weep," answered the frog, "I can help
you; but what will you give me if I fetch up your ball again?" -
"Whatever you like, dear frog," said she, "any of my clothes, my
pearls and jewels, or even the golden crown that I wear." - "Thy
clothes, thy pearls and jewels, and thy golden crown are not for me,"
answered the frog, "but if thou wouldst love me, and have me for thy
companion and play-fellow, and let me sit by thee at table, and eat from
thy plate, and drink from thy cup, and sleep in thy little bed, if thou
wouldst promise all this, then would I dive below the water and fetch
thee thy golden ball again." - "Oh yes," she answered, "I will
promise it all, whatever you want, if you will only get me my ball
again." But she thought to herself: What nonsense he talks! As if he
could do anything but sit in the water and croak with the other frogs,
or could possibly be any one's companion.

But the frog, as soon as he heard her promise, drew his head under the
water and sank down out of sight, but after a while he came to the
surface again with the ball in his mouth, and he threw it on the grass.
The King's daughter was overjoyed to see her pretty plaything again,
and she caught it up and ran off with it. "Stop, stop!" cried the
frog, "take me up too. I cannot run as fast as you!" But it was of no
use, for croak, croak after her as he might, she would not listen to
him, but made haste home, and very soon forgot all about the poor frog,
who had to betake himself to his well again.

The next day, when the King's daughter was sitting at table with the
King and all the court, and eating from her golden plate, there came
something pitter patter up the marble stairs, and then there came a
knocking at the door, and a voice crying: "Youngest King's daughter,
let me in!" And she got up and ran to see who it could be, but when she
opened the door, there was the frog sitting outside. Then she shut the
door hastily and went back to her seat, feeling very uneasy. The King
noticed how quickly her heart was beating, and said: "My child, what
are you afraid of? Is there a giant standing at the door ready to carry
you away?" - "Oh no," answered she, "no giant, but a horrid
frog." - "And what does the frog want?" asked the King. "O dear
father," answered she, "when I was sitting by the well yesterday, and
playing with my golden ball, it fell into the water, and while I was
crying for the loss of it, the frog came and got it again for me on
condition I would let him be my companion, but I never thought that he
could leave the water and come after me; but now there he is outside the
door, and he wants to come in to me." And then they all heard him
knocking the second time and crying:

"Youngest King's daughter,
Open to me!
By the well water
What promised
you me?
Youngest King's daughter
Now open to me!"

"That which thou hast promised must thou perform," said the King, "so
go now and let him in." So she went and opened the door, and the frog
hopped in, following at her heels, till she reached her chair. Then he
stopped and cried: "Lift me up to sit by you." But she delayed doing
so until the King ordered her. When once the frog was on the chair, he
wanted to get on the table, and there he sat and said: "Now push your
golden plate a little nearer, so that we may eat together." And so she
did, but everybody might see how unwilling she was, and the frog feasted
heartily, but every morsel seemed to stick in her throat. "I have had
enough now," said the frog at last, "and as I am tired, you must carry
me to your room, and make ready your silken bed, and we will lie down
and go to sleep." Then the King's daughter began to weep, and was
afraid of the cold frog, that nothing would satisfy him but he must
sleep in her pretty clean bed. Now the King grew angry with her, saying:
"That which thou hast promised in thy time of necessity, must thou now
perform." So she picked up the frog with her finger and thumb, carried
him upstairs and put him in a corner, and when she had lain down to
sleep, he came creeping up, saying: "I am tired and want sleep as much
as you; take me up, or I will tell your father." Then she felt beside
herself with rage, and picking him up, she threw him with all her
strength against the wall, crying: "Now will you be quiet, you horrid
frog!"

But as he fell, he ceased to be a frog, and became all at once a prince
with beautiful kind eyes. And it came to pass that, with her father's
consent, they became bride and bridegroom. And he told her how a wicked
witch had bound him by her spells, and how no one but she alone could
have released him, and that they two would go together to his father's
kingdom. And there came to the door a carriage drawn by eight white
horses, with white plumes on their heads, and with golden harness, and
behind the carriage was standing faithful Henry, the servant of the
young prince. Now, faithful Henry had suffered such care and pain when
his master was turned into a frog, that he had been obliged to wear
three iron bands over his heart, to keep it from breaking with trouble
and anxiety. When the carriage started to take the prince to his
kingdom, and faithful Henry had helped them both in, he got up behind,
and was full of joy at his master's deliverance.

And when they had gone a part of the way, the prince heard a sound at
the back of the carriage, as if something had broken, and he turned
round and cried:

"Henry, the wheel must be breaking!"
"The wheel does not break,
'Tis the band round my heart
That, to lessen its ache,
When I grieved for your sake,
I bound round my heart."

Again, and yet once again there was the same sound, and the prince
thought it must be the wheel breaking, but it was the breaking of the
other bands from faithful Henry's heart, because it was now so relieved
and happy.
