# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_mouse_the_bird_and_the_sausage
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The mouse, the bird, and the sausage 

Once upon a time a mouse, a bird, and a sausage formed a partnership.
They kept house together, and for a long time they lived in peace and
prosperity, acquiring many possessions. The bird's task was to fly into
the forest every day to fetch wood. The mouse carried water, made the
fire, and set the table. The sausage did the cooking.

Whoever is too well off always wants to try something different! Thus
one day the bird chanced to meet another bird, who boasted to him of his
own situation. This bird criticized him for working so hard while the
other two enjoyed themselves at home. For after the mouse had made the
fire and carried the water, she could sit in the parlor and rest until
it was time for her to set the table. The sausage had only to stay by
the pot watching the food cook. When mealtime approached, she would
slither through the porridge or the vegetables, and thus everything was
greased and salted and ready to eat. The bird would bring his load of
wood home. They would eat their meal, and then sleep soundly until the
next morning. It was a great life.

The next day, because of his friend's advice, the bird refused to go to
the forest, saying that he had been their servant long enough. He was no
longer going to be a fool for them. Everyone should try a different task
for a change. The mouse and the sausage argued against this, but the
bird was the master, and he insisted that they give it a try. The
sausage was to fetch wood, the mouse became the cook, and the bird was
to carry water.

And what was the result? The sausage trudged off toward the forest; the
bird made the fire; and the mouse put on the pot and waited for the
sausage to return with wood for the next day. However, the sausage
stayed out so long that the other two feared that something bad had
happened. The bird flew off to see if he could find her. A short
distance away he came upon a dog that had seized the sausage as free
booty and was making off with her. The bird complained bitterly to the
dog about this brazen abduction, but he claimed that he had discovered
forged letters on the sausage, and that she would thus have to forfeit
her life to him.

Filled with sorrow, the bird carried the wood home himself and told the
mouse what he had seen and heard. They were very sad, but were
determined to stay together and make the best of it. The bird set the
table while the mouse prepared the food. She jumped into the pot, as the
sausage had always done, in order to slither and weave in and about the
vegetables and grease them, but before she reached the middle, her hair
and skin were scalded off, and she perished.

When the bird wanted to eat, no cook was there. Beside himself, he threw
the wood this way and that, called out, looked everywhere, but no cook
was to be found. Because of his carelessness, the scattered wood caught
fire, and the entire house was soon aflame. The bird rushed to fetch
water, but the bucket fell into the well, carrying him with it, and he
drowned.
