# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_elves
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The elves 

FIRST STORY

A shoemaker, by no fault of his own, had become so poor that at last he
had nothing left but leather for one pair of shoes. So in the evening,
he cut out the shoes which he wished to begin to make the next morning,
and as he had a good conscience, he lay down quietly in his bed,
commended himself to God, and fell asleep. In the morning, after he had
said his prayers, and was just going to sit down to work, the two shoes
stood quite finished on his table. He was astounded, and knew not what
to say to it. He took the shoes in his hands to observe them closer, and
they were so neatly made that there was not one bad stitch in them, just
as if they were intended as a masterpiece. Soon after, a buyer came in,
and as the shoes pleased him so well, he paid more for them than was
customary, and, with the money, the shoemaker was able to purchase
leather for two pairs of shoes. He cut them out at night, and next
morning was about to set to work with fresh courage; but he had no need
to do so, for, when he got up, they were already made, and buyers also
were not wanting, who gave him money enough to buy leather for four
pairs of shoes. The following morning, too, he found the four pairs
made; and so it went on constantly, what he cut out in the evening was
finished by the morning, so that he soon had his honest independence
again, and at last became a wealthy man. Now it befell that one evening
not long before Christmas, when the man had been cutting out, he said to
his wife, before going to bed, "What think you if we were to stay up
to-night to see who it is that lends us this helping hand?" The woman
liked the idea, and lighted a candle, and then they hid themselves in a
corner of the room, behind some clothes which were hanging up there, and
watched. When it was midnight, two pretty little naked men came, sat
down by the shoemaker's table, took all the work which was cut out
before them and began to stitch, and sew, and hammer so skilfully and so
quickly with their little fingers that the shoemaker could not turn away
his eyes for astonishment. They did not stop until all was done, and
stood finished on the table, and they ran quickly away.

Next morning the woman said, "The little men have made us rich, and we
really must show that we are grateful for it. They run about so, and
have nothing on, and must be cold. I'll tell thee what I'll do: I will
make them little shirts, and coats, and vests, and trousers, and knit
both of them a pair of stockings, and do thou, too, make them two little
pairs of shoes." The man said, "I shall be very glad to do it;" and
one night, when everything was ready, they laid their presents all
together on the table instead of the cut-out work, and then concealed
themselves to see how the little men would behave. At midnight they came
bounding in, and wanted to get to work at once, but as they did not find
any leather cut out, but only the pretty little articles of clothing,
they were at first astonished, and then they showed intense delight.
They dressed themselves with the greatest rapidity, putting the pretty
clothes on, and singing,

"Now we are boys so fine to see,
Why should we longer cobblers be?"
Then they danced and skipped and leapt over chairs and benches. At last
they danced out of doors. From that time forth they came no more, but as
long as the shoemaker lived all went well with him, and all his
undertakings prospered.

SECOND STORY

There was once a poor servant-girl, who was industrious and cleanly, and
swept the house every day, and emptied her sweepings on the great heap
in front of the door. One morning when she was just going back to her
work, she found a letter on this heap, and as she could not read, she
put her broom in the corner, and took the letter to her master and
mistress, and behold it was an invitation from the elves, who asked the
girl to hold a child for them at its christening. The girl did not know
what to do, but at length, after much persuasion, and as they told her
that it was not right to refuse an invitation of this kind, she
consented. Then three elves came and conducted her to a hollow mountain,
where the little folks lived. Everything there was small, but more
elegant and beautiful than can be described. The baby's mother lay in a
bed of black ebony ornamented with pearls, the coverlids were
embroidered with gold, the cradle was of ivory, the bath of gold. The
girl stood as godmother, and then wanted to go home again, but the
little elves urgently entreated her to stay three days with them. So she
stayed, and passed the time in pleasure and gaiety, and the little folks
did all they could to make her happy. At last she set out on her way
home. Then first they filled her pockets quite full of money, and after
that they led her out of the mountain again. When she got home, she
wanted to begin her work, and took the broom, which was still standing
in the corner, in her hand and began to sweep. Then some strangers came
out of the house, who asked her who she was, and what business she had
there? And she had not, as she thought, been three days with the little
men in the mountains, but seven years, and in the meantime her former
masters had died.

THIRD STORY

A certain mother's child had been taken away out of its cradle by the
elves, and a changeling with a large head and staring eyes, which would
do nothing but eat and drink, laid in its place. In her trouble she went
to her neighbour, and asked her advice. The neighbour said that she was
to carry the changeling into the kitchen, set it down on the hearth,
light a fire, and boil some water in two egg-shells, which would make
the changeling laugh, and if he laughed, all would be over with him. The
woman did everything that her neighbour bade her. When she put the
egg-shells with water on the fire, the imp said, "I am as old now as
the Wester forest, but never yet have I seen any one boil anything in an
egg-shell!" And he began to laugh at it. Whilst he was laughing,
suddenly came a host of little elves, who brought the right child, set
it down on the hearth, and took the changeling away with them.
