# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/old_rinkrank
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Old Rinkrank 

There was once on a time a King who had a daughter, and he caused a
glass mountain to be made, and said that whosoever could cross to the
other side of it without falling should have his daughter to wife. Then
there was one who loved the King's daughter, and he asked the King if
he might have her. "Yes," said the King; "if you can cross the
mountain without falling, you shall have her." And the princess said
she would go over it with him, and would hold him if he were about to
fall. So they set out together to go over it, and when they were half
way up the princess slipped and fell, and the glass-mountain opened and
shut her up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she had
gone, for the mountain closed immediately. Then he wept and lamented
much, and the King was miserable too, and had the mountain broken open
where she had been lost, and though the would be able to get her out
again, but they could not find the place into which she had fallen.
Meanwhile the King's daughter had fallen quite deep down into the earth
into a great cave. An old fellow with a very long gray beard came to
meet her, and told her that if she would be his servant and do
everything he bade her, she might live, if not he would kill her. So she
did all he bade her. In the mornings he took his ladder out of his
pocket, and set it up against the mountain and climbed to the top by its
help, and then he drew up the ladder after him. The princess had to cook
his dinner, make his bed, and do all his work, and when he came home
again he always brought with him a heap of gold and silver. When she had
lived with him for many years, and had grown quite old, he called her
Mother Mansrot, and she had to call him Old Rinkrank. Then once when he
was out, and she had made his bed and washed his dishes, she shut the
doors and windows all fast, and there was one little window through
which the light shone in, and this she left open. When Old Rinkrank came
home, he knocked at his door, and cried, "Mother Mansrot, open the door
for me." - "No," said she, "Old Rinkrank, I will not open the door
for thee." Then he said,

"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Wash my dishes, Mother Mansrot."
"I have washed thy dishes already," said she. Then again he said,

"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Make me my bed, Mother Mansrot."
"I have made thy bed already," said she. Then again he said,

"Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Open the door, Mother Mansrot."
Then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little window was
open, and thought, "I will look in and see what she can be about, and
why she will not open the door for me." He tried to peep in, but could
not get his head through because of his long beard. So he first put his
beard through the open window, but just as he had got it through, Mother
Mansrot came by and pulled the window down with a cord which she had
tied to it, and his beard was shut fast in it. Then he began to cry most
piteously, for it hurt him very much, and to entreat her to release him
again. But she said not until he gave her the ladder with which he
ascended the mountain. Then, whether he would or not, he had to tell her
where the ladder was. And she fastened a very long ribbon to the window,
and then she set up the ladder, and ascended the mountain, and when she
was at the top of it she opened the window. She went to her father, and
told him all that had happened to her. The King rejoiced greatly, and
her betrothed was still there, and they went and dug up the mountain,
and found Old Rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver. Then the
King had Old Rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold and silver.
The princess married her betrothed, and lived right happily in great
magnificence and joy.
