# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/simeli_mountain
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Simeli mountain 

There were once two brothers, the one rich, the other poor. The rich
one, however, gave nothing to the poor one, and he gained a scanty
living by trading in corn, and often did so badly that he had no bread
for his wife and children. Once when he was wheeling a barrow through
the forest he saw, on one side of him, a great, bare, naked-looking
mountain, and as he had never seen it before, he stood still and stared
at it with amazement.
While he was thus standing he saw a twelve great, wild men coming
towards him, and as he believed they were robbers he pushed his barrow
into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see what would
happen. The twelve men, however, went to the mountain and cried, "Semsi
mountain, Semsi mountain, open," and immediately the barren mountain
opened down the middle, and the twelve went into it, and as soon as they
were within, it shut. After a short time, however, it opened again, and
the men came forth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders, and when
they were all once more in the daylight they said, "Semsi mountain,
Semsi mountain, shut thyself;" then the mountain closed together, and
there was no longer any entrance to be seen to it, and the twelve went
away.

When they were quite out of sight the poor man got down from the tree,
and was curious to know what really was secretly hidden in the mountain.
So he went up to it and said, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, open,"
and the mountain opened to him also. The he went inside, and the whole
mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold, and behind lay great
piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn. The poor man
hardly knew what to do, and whether he might take any of these treasures
for himself or not; but at last he filled his pockets with gold, but he
left the pearls and precious stones where they were. When he came out
again he also said, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, shut thyself;"
and the mountain closed itself, and he went home with his barrow.

And now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy bread for his
wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain. He lived
joyously and uprightly, gave help to the poor, and did good to every
one. When, however, the money came to an end he went to his brother,
borrowed a measure that held a bushel, and brought himself some more,
but did not touch any of the most valuable things. When for the third
time he wanted to fetch something, he again borrowed the measure of his
brother. The rich man had, however, long been envious of his brother's
possessions, and of the handsome way of living which he had set on foot,
and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what his
brother wanted with the measure. Then he thought of a cunning trick, and
covered the bottom of the measure with pitch, and when he got the
measure back a piece of money was sticking in it. He at once went to his
brother and asked him, "What hast thou been measuring in the bushel
measure?" - "Corn and barley," said the other. Then he showed him the
piece of money, and threatened that if he did not tell the truth he
would accuse him before a court of justice. The poor man then told him
everything, just as it happened. The rich man, however, ordered his
carriage to be made ready, and drove away, resolved to use the
opportunity better than his brother had done, and to bring back with him
quite different treasures.

When he came to the mountain he cried, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain,
open." The mountain opened, and he went inside it. There lay the
treasures all before him, and for a long time he did not know which to
clutch at first. At length he loaded himself with as many precious
stones as he could carry. He wished to carry his burden outside, but, as
his heart and soul were entirely full of the treasures, he had forgotten
the name of the mountain, and cried, "Simeli mountain, Simeli mountain,
open." That, however, was not the right name, and the mountain never
stirred, but remained shut. Then he was alarmed, but the longer he
thought about it the more his thoughts confused themselves, and his
treasures were no more of any use to him. In the evening the mountain
opened, and the twelve robbers came in, and when they saw him they
laughed, and cried out, "Bird, have we caught thee at last! Didst thou
think we had never noticed that thou hadst been in here twice? We could
not catch thee then; this third time thou shalt not get out again!"
Then he cried, "It was not I, it was my brother," but let him beg for
his life and say what he would, they cut his head off.
