# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/aschenputtel
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Cinderella 

There was once a rich man whose wife lay sick, and when she felt her end
drawing near she called to her only daughter to come near her bed, and
said, "Dear child, be pious and good, and God will always take care of
you, and I will look down upon you from heaven, and will be with you."
And then she closed her eyes and expired. The maiden went every day to
her mother's grave and wept, and was always pious and good. When the
winter came the snow covered the grave with a white covering, and when
the sun came in the early spring and melted it away, the man took to
himself another wife.

The new wife brought two daughters home with her, and they were
beautiful and fair in appearance, but at heart were, black and ugly. And
then began very evil times for the poor step-daughter. "Is the stupid
creature to sit in the same room with us?" said they; "those who eat
food must earn it. Out upon her for a kitchen-maid!" They took away her
pretty dresses, and put on her an old grey kirtle, and gave her wooden
shoes to wear. "Just look now at the proud princess, how she is decked
out!" cried they laughing, and then they sent her into the kitchen.
There she was obliged to do heavy work from morning to night, get up
early in the morning, draw water, make the fires, cook, and wash.
Besides that, the sisters did their utmost to torment her, mocking her,
and strewing peas and lentils among the ashes, and setting her to pick
them up. In the evenings, when she was quite tired out with her hard
day's work, she had no bed to lie on, but was obliged to rest on the
hearth among the cinders. And as she always looked dusty and dirty, they
named her Cinderella.

It happened one day that the father went to the fair, and he asked his
two step-daughters what he should bring back for them. "Fine clothes!"
said one. "Pearls and jewels!" said the other. "But what will you
have, Cinderella?" said he. "The first twig, father, that strikes
against your hat on the way home; that is what I should like you to
bring me." So he bought for the two step-daughters fine clothes,
pearls, and jewels, and on his way back, as he rode through a green
lane, a hazel-twig struck against his hat; and he broke it off and
carried it home with him. And when he reached home he gave to the
step-daughters what they had wished for, and to Cinderella he gave the
hazel-twig. She thanked him, and went to her mother's grave, and
planted this twig there, weeping so bitterly that the tears fell upon it
and watered it, and it flourished and became a fine tree. Cinderella
went to see it three times a day, and wept and prayed, and each time a
white bird rose up from the tree, and if she uttered any wish the bird
brought her whatever she had wished for.

Now if came to pass that the king ordained a festival that should last
for three days, and to which all the beautiful young women of that
country were bidden, so that the king's son might choose a bride from
among them. When the two stepdaughters heard that they too were bidden
to appear, they felt very pleased, and they called Cinderella, and said,
"Comb our hair, brush our shoes, and make our buckles fast, we are
going to the wedding feast at the king's castle." Cinderella, when she
heard this, could not help crying, for she too would have liked to go to
the dance, and she begged her step-mother to allow her. "What, you
Cinderella!" said she, "in all your dust and dirt, you want to go to
the festival! you that have no dress and no shoes! you want to dance!"
But as she persisted in asking, at last the step-mother said, "I have
strewed a dish-full of lentils in the ashes, and if you can pick them
all up again in two hours you may go with us." Then the maiden went to
the backdoor that led into the garden, and called out, "O gentle doves,
O turtle-doves, And all the birds that be, The lentils that in ashes lie
Come and pick up for me!

The good must be put in the dish,
The bad you may eat if you wish."

Then there came to the kitchen-window two white doves, and after them
some turtle-doves, and at last a crowd of all the birds under heaven,
chirping and fluttering, and they alighted among the ashes; and the
doves nodded with their heads, and began to pick, peck, pick, peck, and
then all the others began to pick, peck, pick, peck, and put all the
good grains into the dish. Before an hour was over all was done, and
they flew away. Then the maiden brought the dish to her step-mother,
feeling joyful, and thinking that now she should go to the feast; but
the step-mother said, "No, Cinderella, you have no proper clothes, and
you do not know how to dance, and you would be laughed at!" And when
Cinderella cried for disappointment, she added, "If you can pick two
dishes full of lentils out of the ashes, nice and clean, you shall go
with us," thinking to herself, "for that is not possible." When she
had strewed two dishes full of lentils among the ashes the maiden went
through the backdoor into the garden, and cried, "O gentle doves, O
turtle-doves, And all the birds that be, The lentils that in ashes lie
Come and pick up for me!

The good must be put in the dish,
The bad you may eat if you wish."

So there came to the kitchen-window two white doves, and then some
turtle-doves, and at last a crowd of all the other birds under heaven,
chirping and fluttering, and they alighted among the ashes, and the
doves nodded with their heads and began to pick, peck, pick, peck, and
then all the others began to pick, peck, pick, peck, and put all the
good grains into the dish. And before half-an-hour was over it was all
done, and they flew away. Then the maiden took the dishes to the
stepmother, feeling joyful, and thinking that now she should go with
them to the feast; but she said "All this is of no good to you; you
cannot come with us, for you have no proper clothes, and cannot dance;
you would put us to shame." Then she turned her back on poor
Cinderella, and made haste to set out with her two proud daughters.

And as there was no one left in the house, Cinderella went to her
mother's grave, under the hazel bush, and cried,

"Little tree, little tree, shake over me,
That silver and gold may come down and cover me."

Then the bird threw down a dress of gold and silver, and a pair of
slippers embroidered with silk and silver. , And in all haste she put on
the dress and went to the festival. But her step-mother and sisters did
not know her, and thought she must be a foreign princess, she looked so
beautiful in her golden dress. Of Cinderella they never thought at all,
and supposed that she was sitting at home, arid picking the lentils out
of the ashes. The King's son came to meet her, and took her by the hand
and danced with her, and he refused to stand up with any one else, so
that he might not be obliged to let go her hand; and when any one came
to claim it he answered, "She is my partner."

And when the evening came she wanted to go home, but the prince said he
would go with her to take care of her, for he wanted to see where the
beautiful maiden lived. But she escaped him, and jumped up into the
pigeon-house. Then the prince waited until the father came, and told him
the strange maiden had jumped into the pigeon-house. The father thought
to himself, "It cannot surely be Cinderella," and called for axes and
hatchets, and had the pigeon-house cut down, but there was no one in it.
And when they entered the house there sat Cinderella in her dirty
clothes among the cinders, and a little oil-lamp burnt dimly in the
chimney; for Cinderella had been very quick, and had jumped out of the
pigeon-house again, and had run to the hazel bush; and there she had
taken off her beautiful dress and had laid it on the grave, and the bird
had carried it away again, and then she had put on her little gray
kirtle again, and had sat down in. the kitchen among the cinders.

The next day, when the festival began anew, and the parents and
step-sisters had gone to it, Cinderella went to the hazel bush and
cried,

"Little tree, little tree, shake over me,
That silver and gold may come down and cover me."

Then the bird cast down a still more splendid dress than on the day
before. And when she appeared in it among the guests every one was
astonished at her beauty. The prince had been waiting until she came,
and he took her hand and danced with her alone. And when any one else
came to invite her he said, "She is my partner." And when the evening
came she wanted to go home, and the prince followed her, for he wanted
to see to what house she belonged; but she broke away from him, and ran
into the garden at the back of the house. There stood a fine large tree,
bearing splendid pears; she leapt as lightly as a squirrel among the
branches, and the prince did not know what had become of her. So he
waited until the father came, and then he told him that the strange
maiden had rushed from him, and that he thought she had gone up into the
pear-tree. The father thought to himself, "It cannot surely be
Cinderella," and called for an axe, and felled the tree, but there was
no one in it. And when they went into the kitchen there sat Cinderella
among the cinders, as usual, for she had got down the other side of the
tree, and had taken back her beautiful clothes to the bird on the hazel
bush, and had put on her old grey kirtle again.

On the third day, when the parents and the step-children had set off,
Cinderella went again to her mother's grave, and said to the tree,

"Little tree, little tree, shake over me,
That silver and gold may come down and cover me."

Then the bird cast down a dress, the like of which had never been seen
for splendour and brilliancy, and slippers that were of gold. And when
she appeared in this dress at the feast nobody knew what to say for
wonderment. The prince danced with her alone, and if any one else asked
her he answered, "She is my partner."

And when it was evening Cinderella wanted to go home, and the prince was
about to go with her, when she ran past him so quickly that he could not
follow her. But he had laid a plan, and had caused all the steps to be
spread with pitch, so that as she rushed down them the left shoe of the
maiden remained sticking in it. The prince picked it up, and saw that it
was of gold, and very small and slender. The next morning he went to the
father and told him that none should be his bride save the one whose
foot the golden shoe should fit. Then the two sisters were very glad,
because they had pretty feet. The eldest went to her room to try on the
shoe, and her mother stood by. But she could not get her great toe into
it, for the shoe was too small; then her mother handed her a knife, and
said, "Cut the toe off, for when you are queen you will never have to
go on foot." So the girl cut her toe off, squeezed her foot into the
shoe, concealed the pain, and went down to the prince. Then he took her
with him on his horse as his bride, and rode off. They had to pass by
the grave, and there sat the two pigeons on the hazel bush, and cried,

"There they go, there they go!
There is blood on her shoe;
The shoe is too small,
Not the right bride at all!"

Then the prince looked at her shoe, and saw the blood flowing. And he
turned his horse round and took the false bride home again, saying she
was not the right one, and that the other sister must try on the shoe.
So she went into her room to do so, and got her toes comfortably in, but
her heel was too large. Then her mother handed her the knife, saying,
"Cut a piece off your heel; when you are queen you will never have to
go on foot." So the girl cut a piece off her heel, and thrust her foot
into the shoe, concealed the pain, and went down to the prince, who took
his bride before him on his horse and rode off. When they passed by the
hazel bush the two pigeons sat there and cried,

"There they go, there they go!
There is blood on her shoe;
The shoe is too small,
Not the right bride at all!"

Then the prince looked at her foot, and saw how the blood was flowing
from the shoe, and staining the white stocking. And he turned his horse
round and brought the false bride home again. "This is not the right
one," said he, "have you no other daughter?" - "No," said the man,
"only my dead wife left behind her a little stunted Cinderella; it is
impossible that she can be the bride." But the King's son ordered her
to be sent for, but the mother said, "Oh no! she is much too dirty, I
could not let her be seen." But he would have her fetched, and so
Cinderella had to appear. First she washed her face and hands quite
clean, and went in and curtseyed to the prince, who held out to her the
golden shoe. Then she sat down on a stool, drew her foot out of the
heavy wooden shoe, and slipped it into the golden one, which fitted it
perfectly. And when she stood up, and the prince looked in her face, he
knew again the beautiful maiden that had danced with him, and he cried,
"This is the right bride!" The step-mother and the two sisters were
thunderstruck, and grew pale with anger; but he put Cinderella before
him on his horse and rode off. And as they passed the hazel bush, the
two white pigeons cried,

"There they go, there they go!
No blood on her shoe;
The shoe's not too small,
The right bride is she after all."

And when they had thus cried, they came flying after and perched on
Cinderella's shoulders, one on the right, the other on the left, and so
remained.

And when her wedding with the prince was appointed to be held the false
sisters came, hoping to curry favour, and to take part in the
festivities. So as the bridal procession went to the church, the eldest
walked on the right side and the younger on the left, and the pigeons
picked out an eye of each of them. And as they returned the elder was on
the left side and the younger on the right, and the pigeons picked out
the other eye of each of them. And so they were condemned to go blind
for the rest of their days because of their wickedness and falsehood.
