# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_good_bargain
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The good bargain 

There was once a peasant who had driven his cow to the fair, and sold
her for seven thalers. On the way home he had to pass a pond, and
already from afar he heard the frogs crying, "Aik, aik, aik, aik." -
"Well," said he to himself, "they are talking without rhyme or
reason, it is seven that I have received, not eight." When he got to
the water, he cried to them, "Stupid animals that you are! Don't you
know better than that? It is seven thalers and not eight." The frogs,
however, stood to their, "aik aik, aik, aik." - "Come, then, if you
won't believe it, I can count it out to you." And he took his money
out of his pocket and counted out the seven thalers, always reckoning
four and twenty groschen to a thaler. The frogs, however, paid no
attention to his reckoning, but still cried, "aik, aik, aik, aik." -
"What," cried the peasant, quite angry, "since you are determined to
know better than I, count it yourselves," and threw all the money into
the water to them. He stood still and wanted to wait until they were
done and had brought him his own again, but the frogs maintained their
opinion and cried continually, "aik, aik, aik, aik," and besides that,
did not throw the money out again. He still waited a long while until
evening came on and he was forced to go home. Then he abused the frogs
and cried, "You water-splashers, you thick-heads, you goggle-eyes, you
have great mouths and can screech till you hurt one's ears, but you
cannot count seven thalers! Do you think I'm going to stand here till
you get done?" And with that he went away, but the frogs still cried,
"aik, aik, aik, aik," after him till he went home quite angry.
After a while he bought another cow, which he killed, and he made the
calculation that if he sold the meat well he might gain as much as the
two cows were worth, and have the skin into the bargain. When therefore
he got to the town with the meat, a great troop of dogs were gathered
together in front of the gate, with a large greyhound at the head of
them, which jumped at the meat, snuffed at it, and barked, "Wow, wow,
wow." As there was no stopping him, the peasant said to him, "Yes,
yes, I know quite well that thou art saying, 'wow, wow, wow,' because
thou wantest some of the meat; but I should fare badly if I were to give
it to thee." The dog, however, answered nothing but "wow, wow." -
"Wilt thou promise not to devour it all then, and wilt thou go bail for
thy companions?" - "Wow, wow, wow," said the dog. "Well, if thou
insistest on it, I will leave it for thee; I know thee well, and know
who is thy master; but this I tell thee, I must have my money in three
days or else it will go ill with thee; thou must just bring it out to
me." Thereupon he unloaded the meat and turned back again, the dogs
fell upon it and loudly barked, "wow, wow."

The countryman, who heard them from afar, said to himself, "Hark, now
they all want some, but the big one is responsible to me for it."

When three days had passed, the countryman thought, "To-night my money
will be in my pocket," and was quite delighted. But no one would come
and pay it. "There is no trusting any one now," said he; and at last
he lost patience, and went into the town to the butcher and demanded his
money. The butcher thought it was a joke, but the peasant said,
"Jesting apart, I will have my money! Did not the great dog bring you
the whole of the slaughtered cow three days ago?" Then the butcher grew
angry, snatched a broomstick and drove him out. "Wait a while," said
the peasant, "there is still some justice in the world!" and went to
the royal palace and begged for an audience. He was led before the King,
who sat there with his daughter, and asked him what injury he had
suffered. "Alas!" said he, "the frogs and the dogs have taken from me
what is mine, and the butcher has paid me for it with the stick," and
he related at full length all that had happened. Thereupon the King's
daughter began to laugh heartily, and the King said to him, "I cannot
give you justice in this, but you shall have my daughter to wife for it,
-- in her whole life she has never yet laughed as she has just done at
thee, and I have promised her to him who could make her laugh. Thou
mayst thank God for thy good fortune!"

"Oh," answered the peasant, "I will not have her, I have a wife
already, and she is one too many for me; when I go home, it is just as
bad as if I had a wife standing in every corner." Then the King grew
angry, and said, "Thou art a boor." - "Ah, Lord King," replied the
peasant, "what can you expect from an ox, but beef?" - "Stop,"
answered the King, "thou shalt have another reward. Be off now, but
come back in three days, and then thou shalt have five hundred counted
out in full."

When the peasant went out by the gate, the sentry said, "Thou hast made
the King's daughter laugh, so thou wilt certainly receive something
good." - "Yes, that is what I think," answered the peasant; "five
hundred are to be counted out to me." - "Hark thee," said the
soldier, "give me some of it. What canst thou do with all that
money?" - "As it is thou," said the peasant, "thou shalt have two
hundred; present thyself in three days' time before the King, and let
it be paid to thee." A Jew, who was standing by and had heard the
conversation, ran after the peasant, held him by the coat, and said,
"Oh, wonder! what a luck-child thou art! I will change it for thee, I
will change it for thee into small coins, what dost thou want with the
great thalers?" - "Jew," said the countryman, "three hundred canst
thou still have; give it to me at once in coin, in three days from this,
thou wilt be paid for it by the King." The Jew was delighted with the
profit, and brought the sum in bad groschen, three of which were worth
two good ones. After three days had passed, according to the King's
command, the peasant went before the King. "Pull his coat off," said
the latter, "and he shall have his five hundred." - "Ah!" said the
peasant, "they no longer belong to me; I presented two hundred of them
to the sentinel, and three hundred the Jew has changed for me, so by
right nothing at all belongs to me." In the meantime the soldier and
the Jew entered and claimed what they had gained from the peasant, and
they received the blows strictly counted out. The soldier bore it
patiently and knew already how it tasted, but the Jew said sorrowfully,
"Alas, alas, are these the heavy thalers?" The King could not help
laughing at the peasant, and as all his anger was gone, he said, "As
thou hast already lost thy reward before it fell to thy lot, I will give
thee something in the place of it. Go into my treasure chamber and get
some money for thyself, as much as thou wilt." The peasant did not need
to be told twice, and stuffed into his big pockets whatsoever would go
in. Afterwards he went to an inn and counted out his money. The Jew had
crept after him and heard how he muttered to himself, "That rogue of a
King has cheated me after all, why could he not have given me the money
himself, and then I should have known what I had? How can I tell now if
what I have had the luck to put in my pockets is right or not?" -
"Good heavens!" said the Jew to himself, "that man is speaking
disrespectfully of our lord the King, I will run and inform, and then I
shall get a reward, and he will be punished as well."

When the King heard of the peasant's words he fell into a passion, and
commanded the Jew to go and bring the offender to him. The Jew ran to
the peasant, "You are to go at once to the lord King in the very
clothes you have on." - "I know what's right better than that,"
answered the peasant, "I shall have a new coat made first. Dost thou
think that a man with so much money in his pocket is to go there in his
ragged old coat?" The Jew, as he saw that the peasant would not stir
without another coat, and as he feared that if the King's anger cooled,
he himself would lose his reward, and the peasant his punishment, said,
"I will out of pure friendship lend thee a coat for the short time.
What will people not do for love!" The peasant was contented with this,
put the Jew's coat on, and went off with him.

The King reproached the countryman because of the evil speaking of which
the Jew had informed him. "Ah," said the peasant, "what a Jew says is
always false -- no true word ever comes out of his mouth! That rascal
there is capable of maintaining that I have his coat on."

"What is that?" shrieked the Jew. "Is the coat not mine? Have I not
lent it to thee out of pure friendship, in order that thou might appear
before the lord King?" When the King heard that, he said, "The Jew has
assuredly deceived one or the other of us, either myself or the
peasant," and again he ordered something to be counted out to him in
hard thalers. The peasant, however, went home in the good coat, with the
good money in his pocket, and said to himself, "This time I have hit
it!"
