# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_peasant_in_heaven
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The peasant in heaven 

Once on a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before the gate of
heaven. At the same time a very rich, rich lord came there who also
wanted to get into heaven. Then Saint Peter came with the key, and
opened the door, and let the great man in, but apparently did not see
the peasant, and shut the door again. And now the peasant outside, heard
how the great man was received in heaven with all kinds of rejoicing,
and how they were making music, and singing within. At length all became
quiet again, and Saint Peter came and opened the gate of heaven, and let
the peasant in. The peasant, however, expected that they would make
music and sing when he went in also, but all remained quite quiet; he
was received with great affection, it is true, and the angels came to
meet him, but no one sang. Then the peasant asked Saint Peter how it was
that they did not sing for him as they had done when the rich man went
in, and said that it seemed to him that there in heaven things were done
with just as much partiality as on earth.

Then said Saint Peter, "By no means, thou art just as dear to us as any
one else, and wilt enjoy every heavenly delight that the rich man
enjoys, but poor fellows like thee come to heaven every day, but a rich
man like this does not come more than once in a hundred years!"
