# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/godfather_death
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Godfather Death 

A poor man had twelve children and had to work day and night in order
just to feed them. Thus when the thirteenth came into the world, not
knowing what to do in his need, he ran out into the highway, intending
to ask the first person whom he met to be the godfather. The first
person who came his way was our dear God, who already knew what was in
his heart, and God said to him, "Poor man, I pity you. I will hold your
child at his baptism, and care for him, and make him happy on earth."
The man said, "Who are you?" - "I am God." - "Then I do not wish to
have you for a godfather," said the man. "You give to the rich, and
let the poor starve." Thus spoke the man, for he did not know how
wisely God divides out wealth and poverty. Then he turned away from the
Lord, and went on his way. Then the devil came to him and said, "What
are you looking for? If you will take me as your child's godfather, I
will give him an abundance of gold and all the joys of the world as
well." The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I am the devil." - "Then I
do not wish to have you for a godfather," said the man. You deceive
mankind and lead them astray." He went on his way, and then Death, on
his withered legs, came walking toward him, and said, "Take me as your
child's godfather." The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I am Death,
who makes everyone equal." Then the man said, "You are the right one.
You take away the rich as well as the poor, without distinction. You
shall be my child's godfather. Death answered, "I will make your child
rich and famous, for he who has me for a friend cannot fail." The man
said, "Next Sunday is the baptism. Be there on time." Death appeared
as he had promised, and served as godfather in an orderly manner.

After the boy came of age his godfather appeared to him one day and
asked him to go with him. He took him out into the woods and showed him
an herb that grew there, saying, "Now you shall receive your
godfather's present. I will turn you into a famous physician. Whenever
you are called to a sick person I will appear to you. If I stand at the
sick person's head, you may say with confidence that you can make him
well again; then give him some of this herb, and he will recover. But if
I stand at the sick person's feet, he is mine, and you must say that he
is beyond help, and that no physician in the world could save him. But
beware of using this herb against my will, or something very bad will
happen to you."

It was not long before the young man had become the most famous
physician in the whole world. People said of him, "He only needs to
look at the sick in order to immediately know their condition, whether
they will regain their health, or are doomed to die." And people came
to him from far and wide, taking him to their sick, and giving him so
much money that he soon became a wealthy man. Now it came to pass that
the king became ill. The physician was summoned and was told to say if a
recovery were possible. However, when he approached the bed, Death was
standing at the sick man's feet, and so no herb on earth would be able
to help him. "If I could only deceive death for once," thought the
physician. "He will be angry, of course, but because I am his godson he
will shut one eye. I will risk it." He therefore took hold of the sick
man and laid him the other way around, so that Death was now standing at
his head. Then he gave the king some of the herb, and he recovered and
became healthy again. However, Death came to the physician, made a dark
and angry face, threatened him with his finger, and said, "You have
betrayed me. I will overlook it this time because you are my godson, but
if you dare to do it again, it will cost you your neck, for I will take
you yourself away with me."

Soon afterward the king's daughter became seriously ill. She was his
only child, and he cried day and night until his eyes were going blind.
Then he proclaimed that whosoever rescued her from death should become
her husband and inherit the crown. When the physician came to the sick
girl's bed he saw Death at her feet. He should have remembered his
godfather's warning, but he was so infatuated by the princess's great
beauty and the prospect of becoming her husband that he threw all
thought to the winds. He did not see that Death was looking at him
angrily, lifting his hand into the air, and threatening him with his
withered fist. He lifted up the sick girl and placed her head where her
feet had been. Then he gave her some of the herb, and her cheeks
immediately turned red, and life stirred in her once again.

Death, seeing that he had been cheated out of his property for a second
time, approached the physician with long strides and said, "You are
finished. Now it is your turn." Then Death seized him so firmly with
his ice-cold hand that he could not resist, and led him into an
underground cavern. There the physician saw how thousands and thousands
of candles were burning in endless rows, some large, others
medium-sized, others small. Every instant some died out, and others were
relit, so that the little flames seemed to be jumping about in constant
change. "See," said Death, "these are the life-lights of mankind. The
large ones belong to children, the medium-sized ones to married people
in their best years, and the little ones to old people. However, even
children and young people often have only a tiny candle." - "Show me
my life-light," said the physician, thinking that it still would be
very large. Death pointed to a little stump that was just threatening to
go out, and said, "See, there it is." - "Oh, dear godfather," said
the horrified physician, "light a new one for me. Do it as a favor to
me, so that I can enjoy my life, and become king and the husband of the
beautiful princess." - "I cannot," answered Death. "One must go out
before a new one is lighted." - "Then set the old one onto a new one
that will go on burning after the old one is finished," begged the
physician. Death pretended that he was going to fulfill this wish and
took hold of a large new candle, but, desiring revenge, he purposely
made a mistake in relighting it, and the little piece fell down and went
out. The physician immediately fell to the ground, and he too was now in
the hands of Death.
