# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_star-money
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The star-money 

There was once on a time a little girl whose father and mother were
dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had any little room to live
in, or bed to sleep in, and at last she had nothing else but the clothes
she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her hand which some
charitable soul had given her. She was, however, good and pious. And as
she was thus forsaken by all the world, she went forth into the open
country, trusting in the good God.

Then a poor man met her, who said: "Ah, give me something to eat, I am
so hungry!" She reached him the whole of her piece of bread, and said:
"May God bless it to thy use," and went onwards. Then came a child who
moaned and said: "My head is so cold, give me something to cover it
with." So she took off her hood and gave it to him; and when she had
walked a little farther, she met another child who had no jacket and was
frozen with cold. Then she gave it her own; and a little farther on one
begged for a frock, and she gave away that also. At length she got into
a forest and it had already become dark, and there came yet another
child, and asked for a little shirt, and the good little girl thought to
herself: "It is a dark night and no one sees thee, thou canst very well
give thy little shirt away," and took it off, and gave away that also.

And as she so stood, and had not one single thing left, suddenly some
stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothing else but hard smooth
pieces of money, and although she had just given her little shirt away,
she had a new one which was of the very finest linen. Then she gathered
together the money into this, and was rich all the days of her life.
