# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/bearskin
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Bearskin 

There was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier, conducted
himself bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets. So
long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, he
received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he liked.
His parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so he went to his
brothers and begged them to take him in, and keep him until war broke
out again. The brothers, however, were hard-hearted and said, "What can
we do with thee? thou art of no use to us; go and make a living for
thyself." The soldier had nothing left but his gun; he took that on his
shoulder, and went forth into the world. He came to a wide heath, on
which nothing was to be seen but a circle of trees; under these he sat
sorrowfully down, and began to think over his fate. "I have no money,"
thought he, "I have learnt no trade but that of fighting, and now that
they have made peace they don't want me any longer; so I see beforehand
that I shall have to starve." All at once he heard a rustling, and when
he looked round, a strange man stood before him, who wore a green coat
and looked right stately, but had a hideous cloven foot. "I know
already what thou art in need of," said the man; "gold and possessions
shall thou have, as much as thou canst make away with do what thou wilt,
but first I must know if thou art fearless, that I may not bestow my
money in vain." - "A soldier and fear - how can those two things go
together?" he answered; "thou canst put me to the proof." - "Very
well, then," answered the man, "look behind thee." The soldier turned
round, and saw a large bear, which came growling towards him. "Oho!"
cried the soldier, "I will tickle thy nose for thee, so that thou shalt
soon lose thy fancy for growling," and he aimed at the bear and shot it
through the muzzle; it fell down and never stirred again. "I see quite
well," said the stranger, "that thou art not wanting in courage, but
there is still another condition which thou wilt have to fulfil." -
"If it does not endanger my salvation," replied the soldier, who knew
very well who was standing by him. "If it does, I'll have nothing to
do with it." - "Thou wilt look to that for thyself," answered
Greencoat; "thou shalt for the next seven years neither wash thyself,
nor comb thy beard, nor thy hair, nor cut thy nails, nor say one
paternoster. I will give thee a coat and a cloak, which during this time
thou must wear. If thou diest during these seven years, thou art mine;
if thou remainest alive, thou art free, and rich to boot, for all the
rest of thy life." The soldier thought of the great extremity in which
he now found himself, and as he so often had gone to meet death, he
resolved to risk it now also, and agreed to the terms. The Devil took
off his green coat, gave it to the soldier, and said, "If thou hast
this coat on thy back and puttest thy hand into the pocket, thou wilt
always find it full of money." Then he pulled the skin off the bear and
said, "This shall be thy cloak, and thy bed also, for thereon shalt
thou sleep, and in no other bed shalt thou lie, and because of this
apparel shalt thou be called Bearskin." After this the Devil vanished.

The soldier put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket, and found that
the thing was really true. Then he put on the bearskin and went forth
into the world, and enjoyed himself, refraining from nothing that did
him good and his money harm. During the first year his appearance was
passable, but during the second he began to look like a monster. His
hair covered nearly the whole of his face, his beard was like a piece of
coarse felt, his fingers had claws, and his face was so covered with
dirt that if cress had been sown on it, it would have come up. Whosoever
saw him, ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that
he might not die during the seven years, and as he paid well for
everything he still always found shelter. In the fourth year, he entered
an inn where the landlord would not receive him, and would not even let
him have a place in the stable, because he was afraid the horses would
be scared. But as Bearskin thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled
out a handful of ducats, the host let himself be persuaded and gave him
a room in an outhouse. Bearskin was, however, obliged to promise not to
let himself be seen, lest the inn should get a bad name.

As Bearskin was sitting alone in the evening, and wishing from the
bottom of his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loud
lamenting in a neighboring room. He had a compassionate heart, so he
opened the door, and saw an old man weeping bitterly, and wringing his
hands. Bearskin went nearer, but the man sprang to his feet and tried to
escape from him. At last when the man perceived that Bearskin's voice
was human he let himself be prevailed on, and by kind words bearskin
succeeded so far that the old man revealed the cause of his grief. His
property had dwindled away by degrees, he and his daughters would have
to starve, and he was so poor that he could not pay the innkeeper, and
was to be put in prison. "If that is your only trouble," said
Bearskin, "I have plenty of money." He caused the innkeeper to be
brought thither, paid him and put a purse full of gold into the poor old
man's pocket besides.

When the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he did not
know how to be grateful enough. "Come with me," said he to Bearskin;
"my daughters are all miracles of beauty, choose one of them for
thyself as a wife. When she hears what thou hast done for me, she will
not refuse thee. Thou dost in truth look a little strange, but she will
soon put thee to rights again." This pleased Bearskin well, and he
went. When the eldest saw him she was so terribly alarmed at his face
that she screamed and ran away. The second stood still and looked at him
from head to foot, but then she said, "How can I accept a husband who
no longer has a human form? The shaven bear that once was here and
passed itself off for a man pleased me far better, for at any rate it
wore a hussar's dress and white gloves. If it were nothing but
ugliness, I might get used to that." The youngest, however, said,
"Dear father, that must be a good man to have helped you out of your
trouble, so if you have promised him a bride for doing it, your promise
must be kept." It was a pity that Bearskin's face was covered with
dirt and with hair, for if not they might have seen how delighted he was
when he heard these words. He took a ring from his finger, broke it in
two, and gave her one half, the other he kept for himself. He wrote his
name, however, on her half, and hers on his, and begged her to keep her
piece carefully, and then he took his leave and said, "I must still
wander about for three years, and if I do not return then, thou art
free, for I shall be dead. But pray to God to preserve my life."

The poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black, and when she
thought of her future bridegroom, tears came into her eyes. Nothing but
contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her sisters. "Take care,"
said the eldest, "if thou givest him thy hand, he will strike his claws
into it." - "Beware!" said the second. "Bears like sweet things, and
if he takes a fancy to thee, he will eat thee up." - "Thou must always
do as he likes," began the elder again, "or else he will growl." And
the second continued, "But the wedding will be a merry one, for bears
dance well." The bride was silent, and did not let them vex her.
Bearskin, however, travelled about the world from one place to another,
did good where he was able, and gave generously to the poor that they
might pray for him.

At length, as the last day of the seven years dawned, he went once more
out on to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle of trees. It
was not long before the wind whistled, and the Devil stood before him
and looked angrily at him; then he threw Bearskin his old coat, and
asked for his own green one back. "We have not got so far as that
yet," answered Bearskin, "thou must first make me clean." Whether the
Devil liked it or not, he was forced to fetch water, and wash Bearskin,
comb his hair, and cut his nails. After this, he looked like a brave
soldier, and was much handsomer than he had ever been before.

When the Devil had gone away, Bearskin was quite lighthearted. He went
into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated himself in a
carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride's house. No
one recognized him, the father took him for a distinguished general, and
led him into the room where his daughters were sitting. He was forced to
place himself between the two eldest, they helped him to wine, gave him
the best pieces of meat, and thought that in all the world they had
never seen a handsomer man. The bride, however, sat opposite to him in
her black dress, and never raised her eyes, nor spoke a word. When at
length he asked the father if he would give him one of his daughters to
wife, the two eldest jumped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on
splendid dresses, for each of them fancied she was the chosen one. The
stranger, as soon as he was alone with his bride, brought out his half
of the ring, and threw it in a glass of wine which he reached across the
table to her. She took the wine, but when she had drunk it, and found
the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began to beat. She got the
other half, which she wore on a ribbon round her neck, joined them, and
saw that the two pieces fitted exactly together. Then said he, "I am
thy betrothed bridegroom, whom thou sawest as Bearskin, but through
God's grace I have again received my human form, and have once more
become clean." He went up to her, embraced her, and gave her a kiss. In
the meantime the two sisters came back in full dress, and when they saw
that the handsome man had fallen to the share of the youngest, and heard
that he was Bearskin, they ran out full of anger and rage. One of them
drowned herself in the well, the other hanged herself on a tree. In the
evening, some one knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened
it, it was the Devil in his green coat, who said, "Seest thou, I have
now got two souls in the place of thy one!"
