# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/little_red_cap
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Little Red Riding Hood 

Once upon a time there was a sweet little girl. Everyone who saw her
liked her, but most of all her grandmother, who did not know what to
give the child next. Once she gave her a little cap made of red velvet.
Because it suited her so well, and she wanted to wear it all the time,
she came to be known as Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother said
to her: "Come Little Red Riding Hood. Here is a piece of cake and a
bottle of wine. Take them to your grandmother. She is sick and weak, and
they will do her well. Mind your manners and give her my greetings.
Behave yourself on the way, and do not leave the path, or you might fall
down and break the glass, and then there will be nothing for your sick
grandmother."

Little Red Riding Hood promised to obey her mother. The grandmother
lived out in the woods, a half hour from the village. When Little Red
Riding Hood entered the woods a wolf came up to her. She did not know
what a wicked animal he was, and was not afraid of him. "Good day to
you, Little Red Riding Hood." - "Thank you, wolf." - "Where are you
going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "To grandmother's." -
"And what are you carrying under your apron?" - "Grandmother is sick
and weak, and I am taking her some cake and wine. We baked yesterday,
and they should give her strength." - "Little Red Riding Hood, just
where does your grandmother live?" - "Her house is a good quarter hour
from here in the woods, under the three large oak trees. There's a
hedge of hazel bushes there. You must know the place," said Little Red
Riding Hood. The wolf thought to himself: "Now there is a tasty bite
for me. Just how are you going to catch her?" Then he said: "Listen,
Little Red Riding Hood, haven't you seen the beautiful flowers that are
blossoming in the woods? Why don't you go and take a look? And I don't
believe you can hear how beautifully the birds are singing. You are
walking along as though you were on your way to school in the village.
It is very beautiful in the woods."

Little Red Riding Hood opened her eyes and saw the sunlight breaking
through the trees and how the ground was covered with beautiful flowers.
She thought: "If a take a bouquet to grandmother, she will be very
pleased. Anyway, it is still early, and I'll be home on time." And she
ran off into the woods looking for flowers. Each time she picked one she
thought that she could see an even more beautiful one a little way off,
and she ran after it, going further and further into the woods. But the
wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house and knocked on the door.
"Who's there?" - "Little Red Riding Hood. I'm bringing you some
cake and wine. Open the door for me." - "Just press the latch,"
called out the grandmother. "I'm too weak to get up." The wolf
pressed the latch, and the door opened. He stepped inside, went straight
to the grandmother's bed, and ate her up. Then he took her clothes, put
them on, and put her cap on his head. He got into her bed and pulled the
curtains shut.

Little Red Riding Hood had run after flowers, and did not continue on
her way to grandmother's until she had gathered all that she could
carry. When she arrived, she found, to her surprise, that the door was
open. She walked into the parlor, and everything looked so strange that
she thought: "Oh, my God, why am I so afraid? I usually like it at
grandmother's." Then she went to the bed and pulled back the curtains.
Grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled down over her face and
looking very strange. "Oh, grandmother, what big ears you have!" -
"All the better to hear you with." - "Oh, grandmother, what big eyes
you have!" - "All the better to see you with." - "Oh, grandmother,
what big hands you have!" - "All the better to grab you with!" -
"Oh, grandmother, what a horribly big mouth you have!" - "All the
better to eat you with!" And with that he jumped out of bed, jumped on
top of poor Little Red Riding Hood, and ate her up.

As soon as the wolf had finished this tasty bite, he climbed back into
bed, fell asleep, and began to snore very loudly. A huntsman was just
passing by. He thought it strange that the old woman was snoring so
loudly, so he decided to take a look. He stepped inside, and in the bed
there lay the wolf that he had been hunting for such a long time. "He
has eaten the grandmother, but perhaps she still can be saved. I won't
shoot him," thought the huntsman. So he took a pair of scissors and cut
open his belly. He had cut only a few strokes when he saw the red cap
shining through. He cut a little more, and the girl jumped out and
cried: "Oh, I was so frightened! It was so dark inside the wolf's
body!" And then the grandmother came out alive as well. Then Little Red
Riding Hood fetched some large heavy stones. They filled the wolf's
body with them, and when he woke up and tried to run away, the stones
were so heavy that he fell down dead.

The three of them were happy. The huntsman took the wolf's pelt. The
grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine that Little Red Riding Hood
had brought. And Little Red Riding Hood thought to herself: "As long as
I live, I will never leave the path and run off into the woods by myself
if mother tells me not to."


------------------------------------------------------------------------


They also tell how Little Red Riding Hood was taking some baked things
to her grandmother another time, when another wolf spoke to her and
wanted her to leave the path. But Little Red Riding Hood took care and
went straight to grandmother's. She told her that she had seen the
wolf, and that he had wished her a good day, but had stared at her in a
wicked manner. "If we hadn't been on a public road, he would have
eaten me up," she said. "Come," said the grandmother. "Let's lock
the door, so he can't get in." Soon afterward the wolf knocked on the
door and called out: "Open up, grandmother. It's Little Red Riding
Hood, and I'm bringing you some baked things." They remained silent,
and did not open the door. The wicked one walked around the house
several times, and finally jumped onto the roof. He wanted to wait until
Little Red Riding Hood went home that evening, then follow her and eat
her up in the darkness. But the grandmother saw what he was up to. There
was a large stone trough in front of the house. "Fetch a bucket, Little
Red Riding Hood," she said. "Yesterday I cooked some sausage. Carry
the water that I boiled them with to the trough." Little Red Riding
Hood carried water until the large, large trough was clear full. The
smell of sausage arose into the wolf's nose. He sniffed and looked
down, stretching his neck so long that he could no longer hold himself,
and he began to slide. He slid off the roof, fell into the trough, and
drowned. And Little Red Riding Hood returned home happily and safely.
