# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_griffin
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The griffin 

There was once upon a time a King, but where he reigned and what he was
called, I do not know. He had no son, but an only daughter who had
always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her. Then it was
foretold to the King that his daughter should eat herself well with an
apple. So he ordered it to be proclaimed throughout the whole of his
kingdom, that whosoever brought his daughter an apple with which she
could eat herself well, should have her to wife, and be King. This
became known to a peasant who had three sons, and he said to the eldest,
"Go out into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples
with the red cheeks and carry them to the court; perhaps the King's
daughter will be able to eat herself well with them, and then thou wilt
marry her and be King." The lad did so, and set out.
When he had gone a short way he met a little iron man who asked him what
he had there in the basket, to which replied Uele, for so was he named,
"Frogs' legs." On this the little man said, "Well, so shall it be,
and remain," and went away. At length Uele arrived at the palace, and
made it known that he had brought apples which would cure the King's
daughter if she ate them. This delighted the King hugely, and he caused
Uele to be brought before him; but, alas! when he opened the basket,
instead of having apples in it he had frogs' legs which were still
kicking about. On this the King grew angry, and had him driven out of
the house. When he got home he told his father how it had fared with
him. Then the father sent the next son, who was called Seame, but all
went with him just as it had gone with Uele. He also met the little iron
man, who asked what he had there in the basket. Seame said, "Hogs'
bristles," and the iron man said, "well, so shall it be, and remain."
When Seame got to the King's palace and said he brought apples with
which the King's daughter might eat herself well, they did not want to
let him go in, and said that one fellow had already been there, and had
treated them as if they were fools. Seame, however, maintained that he
certainly had the apples, and that they ought to let him go in. At
length they believed him, and led him to the King. But when he uncovered
the basket, he had but hogs' bristles. This enraged the King most
terribly, so he caused Seame to be whipped out of the house. When he got
home he related all that had befallen him, then the youngest boy, whose
name was Hans, but who was always called Stupid Hans, came and asked his
father if he might go with some apples. "Oh!" said the father, "thou
wouldst be just the right fellow for such a thing! If the clever ones
can't manage it, what canst thou do?" The boy, however, did not
believe him, and said, "Indeed, father, I wish to go." - "Just get
away, thou stupid fellow, thou must wait till thou art wiser," said the
father to that, and turned his back. Hans, however, pulled at the back
of his smock- frock and said, "Indeed, father, I wish to go." -
"Well, then, so far as I am concerned thou mayst go, but thou wilt soon
come home again!" replied the old man in a spiteful voice. The boy,
however, was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy. "Well, act like
a fool! thou growest more stupid every day!" said the father again.
Hans, however, did not care about that, and did not let it spoil his
pleasure, but as it was then night, he thought he might as well wait
until the morrow, for he could not get to court that day. All night long
he could not sleep in his bed, and if he did doze for a moment, he
dreamt of beautiful maidens, of palaces, of gold, and of silver, and all
kinds of things of that sort. Early in the morning, he went forth on his
way, and directly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in his iron
clothes, came to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket. Hans
gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which the King's
daughter was to eat herself well. "Then," said the little man, "so
shall they be, and remain." But at the court they would none of them
let Hans go in, for they said two had already been there who had told
them that they were bringing apples, and one of them had frogs' legs,
and the other hogs' bristles. Hans, however, resolutely maintained that
he most certainly had no frogs' legs, but some of the most beautiful
apples in the whole kingdom. As he spoke so pleasantly, the door-keeper
thought he could not be telling a lie, and asked him to go in, and he
was right, for when Hans uncovered his basket in the King's presence,
golden-yellow apples came tumbling out. The King was delighted, and
caused some of them to be taken to his daughter, and then waited in
anxious expectation until news should be brought to him of the effect
they had. But before much time had passed by, news was brought to him:
but who do you think it was who came? it was his daughter herself! As
soon as she had eaten of those apples, she was cured, and sprang out of
her bed. The joy the King felt cannot be described! but now he did not
want to give his daughter in marriage to Hans, and said he must first
make him a boat which would go quicker on dry land than on water. Hans
agreed to the conditions, and went home, and related how it had fared
with him. Then the father sent Uele into the forest to make a boat of
that kind. He worked diligently, and whistled all the time. At mid-day,
when the sun was at the highest, came the little iron man and asked what
he was making? Uele gave him for answer, "Wooden bowls for the
kitchen." The iron man said, "So it shall be, and remain." By evening
Uele thought he had now made the boat, but when he wanted to get into
it, he had nothing but wooden bowls. The next day Seame went into the
forest, but everything went with him just as it had done with Uele. On
the third day Stupid Hans went. He worked away most industriously, so
that the whole forest resounded with the heavy strokes, and all the
while he sang and whistled right merrily. At mid-day, when it was the
hottest, the little man came again, and asked what he was making? "A
boat which will go quicker on dry land than on the water," replied
Hans, " and when I have finished it, I am to have the King's daughter
for my wife." - "Well," said the little man, "such an one shall it
be, and remain." In the evening, when the sun had turned into gold,
Hans finished his boat, and all that was wanted for it. He got into it
and rowed to the palace. The boat went as swiftly as the wind. The King
saw it from afar, but would not give his daughter to Hans yet, and said
he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture from early morning
until late evening, and if one of them got away, he should not have his
daughter. Hans was contented with this, and the next day went with his
flock to the pasture, and took great care that none of them ran away.

Before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace, and told
Hans that he must give her a hare instantly, for some visitors had come
unexpectedly. Hans, however, was very well aware what that meant, and
said he would not give her one; the King might set some hare soup before
his guest next day. The maid, however, would not believe in his refusal,
and at last she began to get angry with him. Then Hans said that if the
King's daughter came herself, he would give her a hare. The maid told
this in the palace, and the daughter did go herself. In the meantime,
however, the little man came again to Hans, and asked him what he was
doing there? He said he had to watch over a hundred hares and see that
none of them ran away, and then he might marry the King's daughter and
be King. "Good," said the little man, "there is a whistle for thee,
and if one of them runs away, just whistle with it, and then it will
come back again." When the King's daughter came, Hans gave her a hare
into her apron; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with it, he
whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron, and before she could
turn round was back to the flock again. When the evening came the
hare-herd whistled once more, and looked to see if all were there, and
then drove them to the palace. The King wondered how Hans had been able
to take a hundred hares to graze without losing any of them; he would,
however, not give him his daughter yet, and said he must now bring him a
feather from the Griffin's tail. Hans set out at once, and walked
straight forwards. In the evening he came to a castle, and there he
asked for a night's lodging, for at that time there were no inns. The
lord of the castle promised him that with much pleasure, and asked where
he was going? Hans answered, "To the Griffin." - "Oh! to the Griffin!
They tell me he knows everything, and I have lost the key of an iron
money-chest; so you might be so good as to ask him where it is." -
"Yes, indeed," said Hans, "I will do that." Early the next morning
he went onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in which he
again stayed the night. When the people who lived there learnt that he
was going to the Griffin, they said they had in the house a daughter who
was ill, and that they had already tried every means to cure her, but
none of them had done her any good, and he might be so kind as to ask
the Griffin what would make their daughter healthy again? Hans said he
would willingly do that, and went onwards. Then he came to a lake, and
instead of a ferry-boat, a tall, tall man was there who had to carry
everybody across. The man asked Hans whither he was journeying? "To the
Griffin," said Hans. "Then when you get to him," said the man, "just
ask him why I am forced to carry everybody over the lake." - "Yes,
indeed, most certainly I'll do that," said Hans. Then the man took him
up on his shoulders, and carried him across. At length Hans arrived at
the Griffin's house, but the wife only was at home, and not the Griffin
himself. Then the woman asked him what he wanted? Thereupon he told her
everything;--that he had to get a feather out of the Griffin's tail,
and that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their
money-chest, and he was to ask the Griffin where it was?--that in
another castle the daughter was ill, and he was to learn what would cure
her?--and then not far from thence there was a lake and a man beside
it, who was forced to carry people across it, and he was very anxious to
learn why the man was obliged to do it. Then said the woman, "But look
here, my good friend, no Christian can speak to the Griffin; he devours
them all; but if you like, you can lie down under his bed, and in the
night, when he is quite fast asleep, you can reach out and pull a
feather out of his tail, and as for those things which you are to learn,
I will ask about them myself." Hans was quite satisfied with this, and
got under the bed. In the evening, the Griffin came home, and as soon as
he entered the room, said, "Wife, I smell a Christian." - "Yes,"
said the woman, "one was here to-day, but he went away again;" and on
that the Griffin said no more.

In the middle of the night when the Griffin was snoring loudly, Hans
reached out and plucked a feather from his tail. The Griffin woke up
instantly, and said, "Wife, I smell a Christian, and it seems to me
that somebody was pulling at my tail." His wife said, "Thou hast
certainly been dreaming, and I told thee before that a Christian was
here to-day, but that he went away again. He told me all kinds of things
that in one castle they had lost the key of their money-chest, and could
find it nowhere." - "Oh! the fools!" said the Griffin; "the key lies
in the wood- house under a log of wood behind the door." - "And then
he said that in another castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no
remedy that would cure her." - "Oh! the fools!" said the Griffin;
"under the cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair, and if
she got her hair back she would be well." - "And then he also said
that there was a place where there was a lake and a man beside it who
was forced to carry everybody across." - "Oh, the fool!" said the
Griffin; "if he only put one man down in the middle, he would never
have to carry another across." Early the next morning the Griffin got
up and went out. Then Hans came forth from under the bed, and he had a
beautiful feather, and had heard what the Griffin had said about the
key, and the daughter, and the ferry-man. The Griffin's wife repeated
it all once more to him that he might not forget it, and then he went
home again. First he came to the man by the lake, who asked him what the
Griffin had said, but Hans replied that he must first carry him across,
and then he would tell him. So the man carried him across, and when he
was over Hans told him that all he had to do was to set one person down
in the middle of the lake, and then he would never have to carry over
any more. The man was hugely delighted, and told Hans that out of
gratitude he would take him once more across, and back again. But Hans
said no, he would save him the trouble, he was quite satisfied already,
and pursued his way. Then he came to the castle where the daughter was
ill; he took her on his shoulders, for she could not walk, and carried
her down the cellar-steps and pulled out the toad's nest from beneath
the lowest step and gave it into her hand, and she sprang off his
shoulder and up the steps before him, and was quite cured. Then were the
father and mother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave Hans gifts of
gold and of silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that they gave
him. And when he got to the other castle he went at once into the wood-
house, and found the key under the log of wood behind the door, and took
it to the lord of the castle. He also was not a little pleased, and gave
Hans as a reward much of the gold that was in the chest, and all kinds
of things besides, such as cows, and sheep, and goats. When Hans arrived
before the King, with all these things--with the money, and the gold,
and the silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the King asked him how he
had come by them. Then Hans told him that the Griffin gave every one
whatsoever he wanted. So the King thought he himself could make such
things useful, and set out on his way to the Griffin; but when he got to
the lake, it happened that he was the very first who arrived there after
Hans, and the man put him down in the middle of it and went away, and
the King was drowned. Hans, however, married the daughter, and became
King.
