# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_peasant_and_the_devil
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The peasant and the devil 

There was once on a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose tricks were
much talked about. The best story is, however, how he once got hold of
the Devil, and made a fool of him. The peasant had one day been working
in his field, and as twilight had set in, was making ready for the
journey home, when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his
field, and when, full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little black
devil was sitting on the live coals. "Thou dost indeed sit upon a
treasure!" said the peasant. "Yes, in truth," replied the Devil, "on
a treasure which contains more gold and silver than thou hast ever seen
in thy life!" - "The treasure lies in my field and belongs to me,"
said the peasant. "It is thine," answered the Devil, "if thou wilt
for two years give me the half of everything thy field produces. Money I
have enough of, but I have a desire for the fruits of the earth." The
peasant agreed to the bargain. "In order, however, that no dispute may
arise about the division," said he, "everything that is above ground
shall belong to thee, and what is under the earth to me." The Devil was
quite satisfied with that, but the cunning peasant had sown turnips.
Now when the time for harvest came, the Devil appeared and wanted to
take away his crop; but he found nothing but the yellow withered leaves,
while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up his turnips. "Thou
hast had the best of it for once," said the Devil, "but the next time
that won't do. What grows above ground shall be thine, and what is
under it, mine." - "I am willing," replied the peasant; but when the
time came to sow, he did not again sow turnips, but wheat. The grain
became ripe, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks
down to the ground. When the Devil came, he found nothing but the
stubble, and went away in a fury down into a cleft in the rocks. "That
is the way to cheat the Devil," said the peasant, and went and fetched
away the treasure.
