# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_golden_bird
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The golden bird 

In times gone by there was a king who had at the back of his castle a
beautiful pleasure-garden, in which stood a tree that bore golden
apples. As the apples ripened they were counted, but one morning one was
missing. Then the king was angry, and he ordered that watch should be
kept about the tree every night.

Now the king had three sons, and he sent the eldest to spend the whole
night in the garden; so he watched till midnight, and then he could keep
off sleep no longer, and in the morning another apple was missing. The
second son had to watch the following night; but it fared no better, for
when twelve o'clock had struck he went to sleep, and in the morning
another apple was missing. Now came the turn of the third son to watch,
and he was ready to do so; but the king had less trust in him, and
believed he would acquit himself still worse than his brothers, but in
the end he consented to let him try. So the young man lay down under the
tree to watch, and resolved that sleep should not be master.

When it struck twelve something came rushing through the air, and he saw
in the moonlight a bird flying towards him, whose feathers glittered
like gold. The bird perched upon the tree, and had already pecked off an
apple, when the young man let fly an arrow at it. The bird flew away,
but the arrow had struck its plumage, and one of its golden feathers
fell to the ground: the young man picked it up, and taking it next
morning to the king, told him what had happened in the night. The king
called his council together, and all declared that such a feather was
worth more than the whole kingdom. "Since the feather is so valuable,"
said the king, "one is not enough for me; I must and will have the
whole bird."

So the eldest son set off, and relying on his own cleverness he thought
he should soon find the golden bird. When he had gone some distance he
saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood, and he pointed his gun at him.
The fox cried out, "Do not shoot me, and I will give you good counsel.
You are on your way to find the golden bird, and this evening you will
come to a village, in which two taverns stand facing each other. One
will be brightly lighted up, and there will be plenty of merriment going
on inside; do not mind about that, but go into the other one, although
it will look to you very uninviting.''

"How can a silly beast give one any rational advice?" thought the
king's son and let fly at the fox, but missed him, and he stretched out
his tail and ran quick into the wood. Then the young man went on his
way, and towards evening he came to the village, and there stood the two
taverns; in one singing and dancing was going on, the other looked quite
dull and wretched.

"I should be a fool," said he, "to go into that dismal place, while
there is anything so good close by." So he went into the merry inn, and
there lived in clover, quite forgetting the bird and his father, and all
good counsel.

As time went on, and the eldest son never came home, the second son set
out to seek the golden bird. He met with the fox, just as the eldest
did, and received good advice from him without attending to it. And when
he came to the two taverns, his brother was standing and calling to him
at the window of one of them, out of which came sounds of merriment; so
he could not resist, but went in and revelled to his heart's content.

And then, as time went on, the youngest son wished to go forth, and to
try his luck, but his father would not consent.

"It would be useless," said he; "he is much less likely to find the
bird than his brothers, and if any misfortune were to happen to him he
would not know how to help himself; his wits are none of the best." But
at last, as there was no peace to be had, he let him go.

By the side of the wood sat the fox, begged him to spare his life, and
gave him good counsel. The young man was kind, and said, "Be easy,
little fox, I will do you no harm."

"You shall not repent of it," answered the fox, "and that you may get
there all the sooner, get up and sit on my tail." And no sooner had he
done so than the fox began to run, and off they went over stock and
stone, so that the wind whistled in their hair. When they reached the
village the young man got down, and, following the fox's advice, went
into the mean-looking tavern, without hesitating, and there he passed a
quiet night.

The next morning, when he went out into the field, the fox, who was
sitting there already, said, "I will tell you further what you have to
do. Go straight on until you come to a castle, before which a great band
of soldiers lie, but do not trouble yourself about them, for they will
be all asleep and snoring; pass through them and forward into the
castle, and go through all the rooms, until you come to one where there
is a golden bird hanging in a wooden cage. Near at hand will stand empty
a golden cage of state, but you must beware of taking the bird out of
his ugly cage and putting him into the fine one; if you do so you will
come to harm." After he had finished saying this the fox stretched out
his tail again, and the king's son sat him down upon it; then away they
went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled through their hair.

And when the king's son reached the castle he found everything as the
fox had said: and he at last entered the room where the golden bird was
hanging in a wooden cage, while a golden one was standing by; the three
golden apples too were in the room. Then, thinking it foolish to let the
beautiful bird stay in that mean and ugly cage, he opened the door of
it, took hold of it, and put it in the golden one. In the same moment
the bird uttered a piercing cry. The soldiers awaked, rushed in, seized
the king's son and put him in prison.

The next morning he was brought before a judge, and, as he confessed
everything, condemned to death. But the king said he would spare his
life on one condition, that he should bring him the golden horse whose
paces were swifter than the wind, and that then he should also receive
the golden bird as a reward.

So the king's son set off to find the golden horse, but he sighed, and
was very sad, for how should it be accomplished? And then he saw his old
friend the fox sitting by the roadside.
"Now, you see," said the fox, "ail this has happened, because you
would not listen to me. But be of good courage, I will bring you
through, and will tell you how you are to get the golden horse. You must
go straight on until you come to a castle, where the horse stands in his
stable; before the stable-door the grooms will be lying, but they will
all be asleep and snoring; and you can go and quietly lead out the
horse. But one thing you must mind - take care to put upon him the plain
saddle of wood and leather, and not the golden one, which will hang
close by; otherwise it will go badly with you."

Then the fox stretched out his tail, and the king's son seated himself
upon it, and away they went over stock and stone until the wind whistled
through their hair. And everything happened just as the fox had said,
and he came to the stall where the golden horse was: and as he was about
to put on him the plain saddle, he thought to himself, "Such a
beautiful animal would be disgraced were I not to put on him the good
saddle, which becomes him so well." However, no sooner did the horse
feel the golden saddle touch him than he began to neigh. And the grooms
all awoke, seized the king's son and threw him into prison. The next
morning he was delivered up to justice and condemned to death, but the
king promised him his life, and also to bestow upon him the golden
horse, if he could convey thither the beautiful princess of the golden
castle.

With a heavy heart the king's son set out, but by great good luck he
soon met with the faithful fox. "I ought now to leave you to your own
ill-luck," said the fox, "but I am sorry for you, and will once more
help you in your need. Your way lies straight up to the golden castle:
you will arrive there in the evening, and at night, when all is quiet,
the beautiful princess goes to the bath. And as she is entering the
bathing-house, go up to her and give her a kiss, then she will follow
you, and you can lead her away; but do not suffer her first to go and
take leave of her parents, or it will go ill with you." Then the fox
stretched out his tail; the king's son seated himself upon it, and away
they went over stock and stone, so that the wind whistled through their
hair.

And when he came to the golden castle, all was as the fox had said. He
waited until midnight, when all lay in deep sleep, and then as the
beautiful princess went to the bathing-house he went up to her and gave
her a kiss, and she willingly promised to go with him, but she begged
him earnestly, and with tears, that he would let her first go and take
leave of her parents. At first he denied her prayer, but as she wept so
much the more, and fell at his feet, he gave in at last.

And no sooner had the princess reached her father's bedside than he,
and all who were in the castle, waked up, and the young man was seized
and thrown into prison. The next morning the king said to him, "Thy
life is forfeit, but thou shalt find grace if thou canst level that
mountain that lies before my windows, and over which I am not able to
see: and if this is done within eight days thou shalt have my daughter
for a reward." So the king's son set to work, and dug and shovelled
away without ceasing, but when, on the seventh day, he saw how little he
had accomplished, and that all his work was as nothing, be fell into
great sadness, and gave up all hope.

But on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared, and said, "You
do not deserve that I should help you, but go now and lie down to sleep,
and I will do the work for you." The next morning when he awoke, and
looked out of the window, the mountain had disappeared. The young man
hastened full of joy to the king, and told him that his behest was
fulfilled, and, whether the king liked it or not, he had to keep to his
word, and let his daughter go. So they both went away together, and it
was not long before the faithful fox came up to them.

"Well, you have got the best first," said he; "but you must know the
golden, horse belongs to the princess of the golden castle." - "But
how shall I get it?" asked the young man. "I am going to tell you,"
answered the fox. "First, go to the king who sent you to the golden
castle, and take to him the beautiful princess. There will then be very
great rejoicing; he will willingly give you the golden horse, and they
will lead him out to you; then mount him without delay, and stretch out
your hand to each of them to take leave, and last of all to the
princess, and when you have her by the hand swing her up on the horse
behind you, and off you go! nobody will be able to overtake you, for
that horse goes swifter than the wind."

And so it was all happily done, and the king's son carried off the
beautiful princess on the golden horse. The fox did not stay behind, and
he said to the young man, "Now, I will help you to get the golden bird.
When you draw near the castle where the bird is, let the lady alight,
and I will take her under my care; then you must ride the golden horse
into the castle-yard, and there will be great rejoicing to see it, and
they will bring out to you the golden bird; as soon as you have the cage
in your hand, you must start off back to us, and then you shall carry
the lady away." The plan was successfully carried out; and when the
young man returned with the treasure, the fox said, "Now, what will you
give me for my reward?" - "What would you like?" asked the young man.
"When we are passing through the wood, I desire that you should slay
me, and cut my head and feet off."

"That were a strange sign of gratitude," said the king's son, "and I
could not possibly do such a thing." Then said the fox, "If you will
not do it, I must leave you; but before I go let me give you some good
advice. Beware of two things: buy no gallows-meat, and sit at no
brook-side." With that the fox ran off into the wood.

The young man thought to himself, "That is a wonderful animal, with
most singular ideas. How should any one buy gallows-meat? and I am sure
I have no particular fancy for sitting by a brook-side." So he rode on
with the beautiful princess, and their way led them through the village
where his two brothers had stayed. There they heard great outcry and
noise, and when he asked what it was all about, they told him that two
people were going to be hanged. And when he drew near he saw that it was
his two brothers, who had done all sorts of evil tricks, and had wasted
all their goods. He asked if there were no means of setting them free.

"Oh yes! if you will buy them off," answered the people; "but why
should you spend your money in redeeming such worthless men?" But he
persisted in doing so; and when they were let go they all went on their
journey together.

After a while they came to the wood where the fox had met them first,
and there it seemed so cool and sheltered from the sun's burning rays
that the two brothers said, "Let us rest here for a little by the
brook, and eat and drink to refresh ourselves." The young man
consented, quite forgetting the fox's warning, and he seated himself by
the brook-side, suspecting no evil. But the two brothers thrust him
backwards into the brook, seized the princess, the horse, and the bird,
and went home to their father.

"Is not this the golden bird that we bring?" said they; "and we have
also the golden horse, and the princess of the golden castle." Then
there was great rejoicing in the royal castle, but the horse did not,
feed, the bird did not chirp, and the princess sat still and wept.

The youngest brother, however, had not perished. The brook was, by good
fortune, dry, and he fell on soft moss without receiving any hurt, but
he could not get up again. But in his need the faithful fox was not
lacking; he came up running, and reproached him for having forgotten his
advice.

"But I cannot forsake you all the same," said he; "I will help you
back again into daylight." So he told the young man to grasp his tail,
and hold on to it fast, and so he drew him up again. "Still you are not
quite out of all danger," said the fox; "your brothers, not being
certain of your death, have surrounded the wood with sentinels, who are
to put you to death if you let yourself be seen." A poor beggar-man was
sitting by the path, and the young man changed clothes with him, and
went clad in that wise into the king's courtyard. Nobody knew him, but
the bird began to chirp, and the horse began to feed, and the beautiful
princess ceased weeping.

"What does this mean?" said the king, astonished. The princess
answered, "I cannot tell, except that I was sad, and now I am joyful;
it is to me as if my rightful bridegroom had returned." Then she told
him all that happened, although the two brothers had threatened to put
her to death if she let out anything.

The king then ordered every person who was in the castle to be brought
before him, and with the rest came the young man like a beggar in his
wretched garments; but the princess knew him, and greeted him well,
falling on his neck and kissing him. The wicked brothers were seized and
put to death, and the youngest brother was married to the princess, and
succeeded to the inheritance of his father.

But what became of the poor fox? Long afterwards the king's son was
going through the wood, and the fox met him and said, "Now, you have
everything that you can wish for, but my misfortunes never come to an
end, and it lies in your power to free me from them." And once more he
prayed the king's son earnestly to slay him, and cut off his head and
feet. So, at last, he consented, and no sooner was it done than the fox
was changed into a man, and was no other than the brother of the
beautiful princess; and thus he was set free from a spell that had bound
him for a long, long time. And now, indeed, there lacked nothing to
their happiness as long as they lived.
