# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_six_swans
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The six swans 

Once on a time a king was hunting in a great wood, and he pursued a wild
animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him. When evening
came he stood still, and looking round him he found that he had lost his
way; and seeking a path, he found none. Then all at once he saw an old
woman with a nodding head coming up to him; and it was a witch.

"My good woman," said he, "can you show me the way out of the wood?"

"Oh yes, my lord king," answered she, "certainly I can; but I must
make a condition, and if you do not fulfil it, you will never get out of
the wood again, but die there of hunger."

"What is the condition?" asked the king.

"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as fair as any in
the world, and if you will take her for your bride, and make her queen,
I will show you the way out of the wood."

The king consented, because of the difficulty he was in, and the old
woman led him into her little house, and there her daughter was sitting
by the fire. She received the king just as if she had been expecting
him, and though he saw that she was very beautiful, she did not please
him, and he could not look at her without an inward shudder.
Nevertheless, he took the maiden before him on his horse, and the old
woman showed him the way, and soon he was in his royal castle again,
where the wedding was held.

The king had been married before, and his first wife had left seven
children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved better than all the
world, and as he was afraid the step-mother might not behave well to
them, and perhaps would do them some mischief, he took them to a lonely
castle standing in the middle of a wood. There they remained hidden, for
the road to it was so hard to find that the king himself could not have
found it, had it not been for a clew of yarn, possessing wonderful
properties, that a wise woman had given him; when he threw it down
before him, it unrolled itself and showed him the way.

And the king went so often to see his dear children, that the queen was
displeased at his absence; and she became curious and wanted to know
what he went out into the wood for so often alone. She bribed his
servants with much money, and they showed her the secret, and told her
of the clew of yam, which alone could point out the way; then she gave
herself no rest until she had found out where the king kept the clew,
and then she made some little white silk shirts, and sewed a charm in
each, as she had learned witchcraft of her mother. And once when the
king had ridden, to the hunt, she took the little shirts and went into
the wood, and the clew of yarn showed her the way. The children seeing
some one in the distance, thought it was their dear father coming to see
them, and came jumping for joy to meet him. Then the wicked queen threw
over each one of the little shirts, and as soon as the shirts touched
their bodies, they were changed into swans, and flew away through the
wood. So the queen went home very pleased to think she had got rid of
her stepchildren; but the maiden had not run out with her brothers, and
so the queen knew nothing about her. The next day the king went to see
his children, but he found nobody but his daughter.

"Where are thy brothers?" asked the king.

"Ah, dear father," answered she, "they are gone away and have left me
behind," and then she told him how she had seen from her window her
brothers in the guise of swans fly away through the wood, and she showed
him the feathers which they had let fall in the courtyard, and which she
had picked up. The king was grieved, but he never dreamt that it was the
queen who had done this wicked deed, and as he feared lest the maiden
also should be stolen away from him, he wished to take her away with
him. But she was afraid of the step-mother, and begged the king to let
her remain one more night in the castle in the wood.

Then she said to herself, "I must stay here no longer, but go and seek
for my brothers." And when the night came, she fled away and went
straight into the wood. She went on all that night and the next day,
until she could go no longer for weariness. At last she saw a rude hut,
and she went in and found a room with six little beds in it; she did not
dare to lie down in one, but she crept under one and lay on the hard
boards and wished for night. When it was near the time of sun-setting
she heard a rustling sound, and saw six swans come flying in at the
window. They alighted on the ground, and blew at one another until they
had blown all their feathers off, and then they stripped off their
swan-skin as if it had been a shirt. And the maiden looked at them and
knew them for her brothers, and was very glad, and crept from under the
bed. The brothers were not less glad when their sister appeared, but
their joy did not last long.

"You must not stay here," said they to her; "this is a robbers'
haunt, and if they were to come and find you here, they would kill
you."

"And cannot you defend me?" asked the little sister.

"No," answered they, "for we can only get rid of our swan-skins and
keep our human shape every evening for a quarter of an hour, but after
that we must be changed again into swans." Their sister wept at hearing
this, and said, "Can nothing be done to set you free?"

"Oh no," answered they, "the work would be too hard for you. For six
whole years you would be obliged never to speak or laugh, and make
during that time six little shirts out of aster-flowers. If you were to
let fall a single word before the work was ended, all would be of no
good." And just as the brothers had finished telling her this, the
quarter of an hour came to an end, and they changed into swans and flew
out of the window.

But the maiden made up her mind to set her brothers free, even though it
should cost her her life. She left the hut, and going into the middle of
the wood, she climbed a tree, and there passed the night. The next
morning she set to work and gathered asters and began sewing them
together: as for speaking, there was no one to speak to, and as for
laughing, she had no mind to it; so she sat on and looked at nothing but
her work. When she had been going on like this for a long time, it
happened that the king of that country went a-hunting in the wood, and
some of his huntsmen came up to the tree in which the maiden sat. They
called out to her, saying, "Who art thou?" But she gave no answer.
"Come down," cried they; "we will do thee no harm." But she only
shook her head. And when they tormented her further with questions she
threw down to them her gold necklace, hoping they would be content with
that. But they would not leave off, so she threw down to them her
girdle, and when that was no good, her garters, and one after another
everything she had on and could possibly spare, until she had nothing
left but her smock. But all was no good, the huntsmen would not be put
off any longer, and they climbed the tree, carried the maiden off, and
brought her to the king.

The king asked, "Who art thou? What wert thou doing in the tree?" But
she answered nothing. He spoke to her in all the languages he knew, but
she remained dumb: but, being very beautiful, the king inclined to her,
and he felt a great love rise up in his heart towards her; and casting
his mantle round her, he put her before him on his horse and brought her
to his castle. Then he caused rich clothing to be put upon her, and her
beauty shone as bright as the morning, but no word would she utter. He
seated her by his side at table, and her modesty and gentle mien so
pleased him, that he said, "This maiden I choose for wife, and no other
in all the world," and accordingly after a few days they were married.

But the king had a wicked mother, who was displeased with the marriage,
and spoke ill of the young queen. "Who knows where the maid can have
come from?" said she, "and not able to speak a word! She is not worthy
of a king!" After a year had passed, and the queen brought her first
child into the world, the old woman carried it away, and marked the
queen's mouth with blood as she lay sleeping. Then she went to the king
and declared that his wife was an eater of human flesh. The king would
not believe such a thing, and ordered that no one should do her any
harm. And the queen went on quietly sewing the shirts and caring for
nothing else. The next time that a fine boy was born, the wicked
step-mother used the same deceit, but the king would give no credence to
her words, for he said, "She is too tender and good to do any such
thing, and if she were only not dumb, and could justify herself, then
her innocence would be as clear as day." When for the third time the
old woman stole away the new-born child and accused the queen, who was
unable to say a word in her defence, the king could do no other but give
her up to justice, and she was sentenced to suffer death by fire.

The day on which her sentence was to be carried out was the very last
one of the sixth year of the years during which she had neither spoken
nor laughed, to free her dear brothers from the evil spell. The six
shirts were ready, all except one which wanted the left sleeve. And when
she was led to the pile of wood, she carried the six shirts on her arm,
and when she mounted the pile and the fire was about to be kindled, all
at once she cried out aloud, for there were six swans coming flying
through the air; and she saw that her deliverance was near, and her
heart beat for joy.

The swans came close up to her with rushing wings, and stooped round
her, so that she could throw the shirts over them; and when that had
been done the swanskins fell off them, and her brothers stood before her
in their own bodies quite safe and sound; but as one shirt wanted the
left sleeve, so the youngest brother had a swan's wing instead of a
left arm. They embraced and kissed each other, and the queen went up to
the king, who looked on full of astonishment, and began to speak to him
and to say, "Dearest husband, now I may dare to speak and tell you that
I am innocent, and have been falsely accused," and she related to him
the treachery of the step-mother, who had taken away the three children
and hidden them. And she was reconciled to the king with great joy, and
the wicked step-mother was bound to the stake on the pile of wood and
burnt to ashes. And the king and queen lived many years with their six
brothers in peace and joy.
