# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_wise_servant
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The wise servant 

How fortunate is the master, and how well all goes in his house, when he
has a wise servant who listens to his orders and does not obey them, but
prefers following his own wisdom. A clever John of this kind was once
sent out by his master to seek a lost cow. He stayed away a long time,
and the master thought, "Faithful John does not spare any pains over
his work!" As, however, he did not come back at all, the master was
afraid lest some misfortune had befallen him, and set out himself to
look for him. He had to search a long time, but at last he perceived the
boy who was running up and down a large field. "Now, dear John," said
the master when he had got up to him, "hast thou found the cow which I
sent thee to seek?" - "No, master," he answered, "I have not found
the cow, but then I have not looked for it." - "Then what hast thou
looked for, John?" - "Something better, and that luckily I have
found." - "What is that, John?" - "Three blackbirds," answered the
boy. "And where are they?" asked the master. "I see one of them, I
hear the other, and I am running after the third," answered the wise
boy.
Take example by this, do not trouble yourselves about your masters or
their orders, but rather do what comes into your head and pleases you,
and then you will act just as wisely as prudent John.
