# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_twelve_idle_servants
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The twelve idle servants 

Twelve servants who had done nothing all the day would not exert
themselves at night either, but laid themselves on the grass and boasted
of their idleness. The first said, "What is your laziness to me, I have
to concern myself about mine own? The care of my body is my principal
work, I eat not a little and drink still more. When I have had four
meals, I fast a short time until I feel hunger again, and that suits me
best. To rise betimes is not for me; when it is getting near mid-day, I
already seek out a resting-place for myself. If the master call, I do
exactly as if I had not heard him, and if he call for the second time, I
wait awhile before I get up, and go to him very slowly. In this way life
is endurable."
The second said, "I have a horse to look after, but I leave the bit in
his mouth, and if I do not want to do it, I give him no food, and I say
he has had it already. I, however, lay myself in the oat-chest and sleep
for four hours. After this I stretch out one foot and move it a couple
of times over the horse's body, and then he is combed and cleaned. Who
is going to make a great business of that? Nevertheless service is too
toilsome for me."

The third said, "Why plague oneself with work? Nothing comes of it! I
laid myself in the sun, and fell asleep. It began to rain a little, but
why should I get up? I let it rain on in God's name. At last came a
splashing shower, so heavy indeed, that it pulled the hair out of my
head and washed it away, and I got a hole in the skull; I put a plaster
on it, and then it was all right. I have already had several injuries of
that kind."

The fourth said, "If I am to undertake a piece of work, I first loiter
about for an hour that I may save up my strength. After that I begin
quite slowly, and ask if no one is there who could help me. Then I let
him do the chief of the work, and in reality only look on; but that also
is still too much for me."

The fifth said, "What does that matter? Just think, I am to take away
the manure from the horse's stable, and load the cart with it. I let it
go on slowly, and if I have taken anything on the fork, I only
half-raise it up, and then I rest just a quarter of an hour until I
quite throw it in. It is enough and to spare if I take out a cartful in
the day. I have no fancy for killing myself with work."

The sixth said, "Shame on ye; I am afraid of no work, but I lie down
for three weeks, and never once take my clothes off. What is the use of
buckling your shoes on? For aught I care they may fall off my feet, it
is no matter. If I am going up some steps, I drag one foot slowly after
the other on to the first step, and then I count the rest of them that I
may know where I must rest.

The seventh said, "That will not do with me; my master looks after my
work, only he is not at home the whole day. But I neglect nothing, I run
as fast as it is possible to do when one crawls. If I am to get on, four
sturdy men must push me with all their might. I came where six men were
lying sleeping on a bed beside each other. I lay down by them and slept
too. There was no wakening me again, and when they wanted to have me
home, they had to carry me." The eighth said, "I see plainly that I am
the only active fellow; if a stone lie before me, I do not give myself
the trouble to raise my legs and step over it. I lay myself down on the
ground, and if I am wet and covered with mud and dirt, I stay lying
until the sun has dried me again. At the very most, I only turn myself
so that it can shine on me." The ninth said, "That is the right way!
To-day the bread was before me, but I was too idle to take it, and
nearly died of hunger! Moreover a jug stood by it, but it was so big and
heavy that I did not like to lift it up, and preferred bearing thirst.
Just to turn myself round was too much for me, I remained lying like a
log the whole day." The tenth said, "Laziness has brought misfortune
on me, a broken leg and swollen calf. Three of us were lying in the
road, and I had my legs stretched out. Some one came with a cart, and
the wheels went over me. I might indeed have drawn my legs back, but I
did not hear the cart coming, for the midges were humming about my ears,
and creeping in at my nose and out again at my mouth; who can take the
trouble to drive the vermin away?"

The eleventh said, "I gave up my place yesterday. I had no fancy for
carrying the heavy books to my master any longer or fetching them away
again. There was no end of it all day long. But to tell the truth, he
gave me my dismissal, and would not keep me any longer, for his clothes,
which I had left lying in the dust, were all moth-eaten, and I am very
glad of it."

The twelfth said, "To-day I had to drive the cart into the country, and
made myself a bed of straw on it, and had a good sleep. The reins
slipped out of my hand, and when I awoke, the horse had nearly torn
itself loose, the harness was gone, the strap which fastened the horse
to the shafts was gone, and so were the collar, the bridle and bit. Some
one had come by, who had carried all off. Besides this, the cart had got
into a quagmire and stuck fast. I left it standing, and stretched myself
on the straw again. At last the master came himself, and pushed the cart
out, and if he had not come I should not be lying here but there, and
sleeping in full tranquillity."
