# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_gold-children
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The gold-children 

There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little
cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing, and always lived from
hand to mouth. But it came to pass one day when the man was sitting by
the water-side, and casting his net, that he drew out a fish entirely of
gold. As he was looking at the fish, full of astonishment, it began to
speak and said, "Hark you, fisherman, if you will throw me back again
into the water, I will change your little hut into a splendid castle."
Then the fisherman answered, "Of what use is a castle to me, if I have
nothing to eat?" The gold fish continued, "That shall be taken care
of, there will be a cupboard in the castle in which, when you open it,
shall be dishes of the most delicate meats, and as many of them as you
can desire." - "If that be true," said the man, "then I can well do
you a favour." - "Yes," said the fish, "there is, however, the
condition that you shall disclose to no one in the world, whosoever he
may be, whence your good luck has come, if you speak but one single
word, all will be over." Then the man threw the wonderful fish back
again into the water, and went home. But where his hovel had formerly
stood, now stood a great castle. He opened wide his eyes, entered, and
saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes, sitting in a splendid room,
and she was quite delighted, and said, "Husband, how has all this come
to pass? It suits me very well." - "Yes," said the man, "it suits me
too, but I am frightfully hungry, just give me something to eat." Said
the wife, "But I have got nothing and don't know where to find
anything in this new house." - "There is no need of your knowing,"
said the man, "for I see yonder a great cupboard, just unlock it."
When she opened it, there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine, quite a bright
prospect.
Then the woman cried joyfully, "What more can you want, my dear?" and
they sat down, and ate and drank together. When they had had enough, the
woman said, "But husband, whence come all these riches?" - "Alas,"
answered he, "do not question me about it, for I dare not tell you
anything; if I disclose it to any one, then all our good fortune will
fly." - "Very good," said she, "if I am not to know anything, then I
do not want to know anything." However, she was not in earnest; she
never rested day or night, and she goaded her husband until in his
impatience he revealed that all was owing to a wonderful golden fish
which he had caught, and to which in return he had given its liberty.
And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with the cupboard
immediately disappeared, they were once more in the old fisherman's
hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former trade and fish. But
fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the golden fish.
"Listen," said the fish, "if you will throw me back into the water
again, I will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of
roast and boiled meats; only be firm, for your life's sake don't
reveal from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again!" - "I
will take good care," answered the fisherman, and threw the fish back
into the water. Now at home everything was once more in its former
magnificence, and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune, but
curiosity left her no peace, so that after a couple of days she began to
ask again how it had come to pass, and how he had managed to secure it.
The man kept silence for a short time, but at last she made him so angry
that he broke out, and betrayed the secret. In an instant the castle
disappeared, and they were back again in their old hut. "Now you have
got what you want," said he; "and we can gnaw at a bare bone
again." - "Ah," said the woman, "I had rather not have riches if I
am not to know from whom they come, for then I have no peace."

The man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw out the
gold fish for a third time. "Listen," said the fish, "I see very well
that I am fated to fall into your hands, take me home and cut me into
six pieces; give your wife two of them to eat, two to your horse and
bury two of them in the ground, then they will bring you a blessing."
The fisherman took the fish home with him, and did as it had bidden him.
It came to pass, however, that from the two pieces that were buried in
the ground two golden lilies sprang up, that the horse had two golden
foals, and the fisherman's wife bore two children who were made
entirely of gold. The children grew up, became tall and handsome, and
the lilies and horses grew likewise. Then they said, "Father, we want
to mount our golden steeds and travel out in the world." But he
answered sorrowfully, "How shall I bear it if you go away, and I know
not how it fares with you?" Then they said, "The two golden lilies
remain here. By them you can see how it is with us; if they are fresh,
then we are in health; if they are withered, we are ill; if they perish,
then we are dead." So they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were
many people, and when they perceived the gold-children they began to
laugh, and jeer. When one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and
would not go out into the world, but turned back and went home again to
his father. But the other rode forward and reached a great forest. As he
was about to enter it, the people said, It is not safe for you to ride
through, the wood is full of robbers who would treat you badly. You will
fare ill, and when they see that you are all of gold, and your horse
likewise, they will assuredly kill you.'

But he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, "I must and
will ride through it." Then he took bear-skins and covered himself and
his horse with them, so that the gold was no more to be seen, and rode
fearlessly into the forest. When he had ridden onward a little he heard
a rustling in the bushes, and heard voices speaking together. From one
side came cries of, "There is one," but from the other, "Let him go,
'tis an idle fellow, as poor and bare as a church-mouse, what should we
gain from him?"

So the gold-child rode joyfully through the forest, and no evil befell
him. One day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was so
beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she
existed in the world. And as such a mighty love took possession of him,
he went up to her and said, "I love thee with my whole heart, wilt thou
be my wife?" He, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreed and
said, "Yes, I will be thy wife, and be true to thee my whole life
long." Then they were married, and just as they were in the greatest
happiness, home came the father of the bride, and when he saw that his
daughter's wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, and said,
"Where is the bridegroom?" They showed him the gold-child, who,
however, still wore his bear-skins. Then the father said wrathfully, "A
vagabond shall never have my daughter!" and was about to kill him. Then
the bride begged as hard as she could, and said, "He is my husband, and
I love him with all my heart!" until at last he allowed himself to be
appeased. Nevertheless the idea never left his thoughts, so that next
morning he rose early, wishing to see whether his daughter's husband
was a common ragged beggar. But when he peeped in, he saw a magnificent
golden man in the bed, and the cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.
Then he went back and thought, "What a good thing it was that I
restrained my anger! I should have committed a great crime." But the
gold-child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag, and when he
awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, "I must go out hunting."
She was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, "You might
easily meet with a great misfortune," but he answered, "I must and
will go."

Thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest, and it was not long
before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his dream. He
aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away. He gave chase
over hedges and ditches for the whole day without feeling tired, but in
the evening the stag vanished from his sight, and when the gold-child
looked round him, he was standing before a little house, wherein was a
witch. He knocked, and a little old woman came out and asked, "What are
you doing so late in the midst of the great forest?" - "Have you not
seen a stag?" - "Yes," answered she, "I know the stag well," and
thereupon a little dog which had come out of the house with her, barked
at the man violently. "Wilt thou be silent, thou odious toad," said
he, "or I will shoot thee dead." Then the witch cried out in a
passion, "What! will you slay my little dog?" and immediately
transformed him, so that he lay like a stone, and his bride awaited him
in vain and thought, "That which I so greatly dreaded, which lay so
heavily on my heart, has come upon him!" But at home the other brother
was standing by the gold-lilies, when one of them suddenly drooped.
"Good heavens!" said he, "my brother has met with some great
misfortune! I must away to see if I can possibly rescue him." Then the
father said, "Stay here, if I lose you also, what shall I do?" But he
answered, "I must and will go forth!"

Then he mounted his golden horse, and rode forth and entered the great
forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. The old witch came out of
her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also, but he did not go
near her, and said, "I will shoot you, if you will not bring my brother
to life again." She touched the stone, though very unwillingly, with
her forefinger, and he was immediately restored to his human shape. But
the two gold-children rejoiced when they saw each other again, kissed
and caressed each other, and rode away together out of the forest, the
one home to his bride, and the other to his father. The father then
said, "I knew well that you had rescued your brother, for the golden
lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again." Then they lived
happily, and all prospered with them until their death.
