# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_three_apprentices
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The three apprentices 

There were once three apprentices, who had agreed to keep always
together while travelling, and always to work in the same town. At one
time, however, their masters had no more work to give them, so that at
last they were in rags, and had nothing to live on. Then one of them
said, "What shall we do? We cannot stay here any longer, we will travel
once more, and if we do not find any work in the town we go to, we will
arrange with the innkeeper there, that we are to write and tell him
where we are staying, so that we can always have news of each other, and
then we will separate." And that seemed best to the others also. They
went forth, and met on the way a richly-dressed man who asked who they
were. "We are apprentices looking for work; Up to this time we have
kept together, but if we cannot find anything to do we are going to
separate." - "There is no need for that," said the man, "if you will
do what I tell you, you shall not want for gold or for work; nay, you
shall become great lords, and drive in your carriages!" One of them
said, "If our souls and salvation be not endangered, we will certainly
do it." - "They will not," replied the man, "I have no claim on
you." One of the others had, however, looked at his feet, and when he
saw a horse's foot and a man's foot, he did not want to have anything
to do with him. The Devil, however, said, "Be easy, I have no designs
on you, but on another soul, which is half my own already, and whose
measure shall but run full." As they were now secure, they consented,
and the Devil told them what he wanted. The first was to answer, "All
three of us," to every question; the second was to say, "For money,"
and the third, "And quite right too!" They were always to say this,
one after the other, but they were not to say one word more, and if they
disobeyed this order, all their money would disappear at once, but so
long as they observed it, their pockets would always be full. As a
beginning, he at once gave them as much as they could carry, and told
them to go to such and such an inn when they got to the town. They went
to it, and the innkeeper came to meet them, and asked if they wished for
anything to eat? The first replied, "All three of us." - "Yes," said
the host, "that is what I mean." The second said, "For money." -
"Of course," said the host. The third said, "And quite right too!" -
"Certainly it is right," said the host.
Good meat and drink were now brought to them, and they were well waited
on. After the dinner came the payment, and the innkeeper gave the bill
to the one who said, "All three of us," the second said, "For
money," and the third, "and quite right too!" - "Indeed it is
right," said the host, "all three pay, and without money I can give
nothing." They, however, paid still more than he had asked. The
lodgers, who were looking on, said, "These people must be mad." -
"Yes, indeed they are," said the host, "they are not very wise." So
they stayed some time in the inn, and said nothing else but, "All three
of us," - "For money," and "And quite right too!" But they saw and
knew all that was going on. It so happened that a great merchant came
with a large sum of money, and said, "Sir host, take care of my money
for me, here are three crazy apprentices who might steal it from me."
The host did as he was asked. As he was carrying the trunk into his
room, he felt that it was heavy with gold. Thereupon he gave the three
apprentices a lodging below, but the merchant came up-stairs into a
separate apartment. When it was midnight, and the host thought that all
were asleep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe and struck the
rich merchant dead; and after they had murdered him they went to bed
again. When it was day there was a great outcry; the merchant lay dead
in bed bathed in blood. All the guests ran at once but the host said,
"The three crazy apprentices have done this;" the lodgers confirmed
it, and said, "It can have been no one else." The innkeeper, however,
had them called, and said to them, "Have you killed the merchant?" -
"All three of us," said the first, "For money," said the second; and
the third added, "And quite right too!" - "There now, you hear,"
said the host, "they confess it themselves." They were taken to
prison, therefore, and were to be tried. When they saw that things were
going so seriously, they were after all afraid, but at night the Devil
came and said, "Bear it just one day longer, and do not play away your
luck, not one hair of your head shall be hurt."

The next morning they were led to the bar, and the judge said, "Are you
the murderers?" - "All three of us." - "Why did you kill the
merchant?" - "For money." - "You wicked wretches, you have no horror
of your sins?" - "And quite right too!" - "They have confessed, and
are still stubborn," said the judge, "lead them to death instantly."
So they were taken out, and the host had to go with them into the
circle. When they were taken hold of by the executioner's men, and were
just going to be led up to the scaffold where the headsman was standing
with naked sword, a coach drawn by four blood-red chestnut horses came
up suddenly, driving so fast that fire flashed from the stones, and
someone made signs from the window with a white handkerchief. Then said
the headsman, "It is a pardon coming," and "Pardon! pardon!" was
called from the carriage also. Then the Devil stepped out as a very
noble gentleman, beautifully dressed, and said, "You three are
innocent; you may now speak, make known what you have seen and heard."
Then said the eldest, "We did not kill the merchant, the murderer is
standing there in the circle," and he pointed to the innkeeper. "In
proof of this, go into his cellar, where many others whom he has killed
are still hanging." Then the judge sent the executioner's men thither,
and they found it was as the apprentices said, and when they had
informed the judge of this, he caused the innkeeper to be led up, and
his head was cut off. Then said the Devil to the three, "Now I have got
the soul which I wanted to have, and you are free, and have money for
the rest of your lives."
