# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_almond_tree
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The almond tree 

Long time ago, perhaps as much as two thousand years, there was a rich
man, and he had a beautiful and pious wife, and they loved each other
very much, and they had no children, though they wished greatly for
some, and the wife prayed for one day and night. Now, in the courtyard
in front of their house stood an almond tree; and one day in winter the
wife was standing beneath it, and paring an apple, and as she pared it
she cut her finger, and the blood fell upon the snow. "Ah," said the
woman, sighing deeply, and looking down at the blood, "if only I could
have a child as red as blood, and as white as snow!" And as she said
these words, her heart suddenly grew light, and she felt sure she should
have her wish. So she went back to the house, and when a month had
passed the snow was gone; in two months everything was green; in three
months the flowers sprang out of the earth; in four months the trees
were in full leaf, and the branches were thickly entwined; the little
birds began to sing, so that the woods echoed, and the blossoms fell
from the trees; when the fifth month had passed the wife stood under the
almond tree, and it smelt so sweet that her heart leaped within her, and
she fell on her knees for joy; and when the sixth month had gone, the
fruit was thick and fine, and she remained still; and the seventh month
she gathered the almonds, and ate them eagerly, and was sick and
sorrowful; and when the eighth month had passed she called to her
husband, and said, weeping, "If I die, bury me under the almond tree."
Then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month had passed, and
then she bore a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she
saw it her joy was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the almond tree, and he wept sore; time
passed, and he became less sad; and after he had grieved a little more
he left off, and then he took another wife.

His second wife bore him a daughter, and his first wife's child was a
son, as red as blood and as white as snow. Whenever the wife looked at
her daughter she felt great love for her, but whenever she looked at the
little boy, evil thoughts came into her heart, of how she could get all
her husband's money for her daughter, and how the boy stood in the way;
and so she took great hatred to him, and drove him from one corner to
another, and gave him a buffet here and a cuff there, so that the poor
child was always in disgrace; when he came back after school hours there
was no peace for him. Once, when the wife went into the room upstairs,
her little daughter followed her, and said, "Mother, give me an
apple." - "Yes, my child," said the mother, and gave her a fine apple
out of the chest, and the chest had a great heavy lid with a strong iron
lock. "Mother," said the little girl, "shall not my brother have one
too?" That was what the mother expected, and she said, "Yes, when he
comes back from school." And when she saw from the window that he was
coming, an evil thought crossed her mind, and she snatched the apple,
and took it from her little daughter, saying, "You shall not have it
before your brother." Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut
to the lid. Then the little boy came in at the door, and she said to him
in a kind tone, but with evil looks, "My son, will you have an
apple?" - "Mother," said the boy, "how terrible you look! yes, give
me an apple!" Then she spoke as kindly as before, holding up the cover
of the chest, "Come here and take out one for yourself." And as the
boy was stooping over the open chest, crash went the lid down, so that
his head flew off among the red apples. But then the woman felt great
terror, and wondered how she could escape the blame. And she went to the
chest of drawers in her bedroom and took a white handkerchief out of the
nearest drawer, and fitting the head to the neck, she bound them with
the handkerchief, so that nothing should be seen, and set him on a chair
before the door with the apple in his hand.

Then came little Marjory into the kitchen to her mother, who was
standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water. "Mother," said
Marjory, "my brother is sitting before the door and he has an apple in
his hand, and looks very pale; I asked him to give me the apple, but he
did not answer me; it seems very strange." - "Go again to him," said
the mother, "and if he will not answer you, give him a box on the
ear." So Marjory went again and said, "Brother, give me the apple."
But as he took no notice, she gave him a box on the ear, and his head
fell off, at which she was greatly terrified, and began to cry and
scream, and ran to her mother, and said, "O mother.1 I have knocked my
brother's head off!" and cried and screamed, and would not cease. "O
Marjory!" said her mother, "what have you done? but keep quiet, that
no one may see there is anything the matter; it can't be helped now; we
will put him out of the way safely."

When the father came home and sat down to table, he said, "Where is my
son?" But the mother was filling a great dish full of black broth, and
Marjory was crying bitterly, for she could not refrain. Then the father
said again, "Where is my son?" - "Oh," said the mother, "he is gone
into the country to his great-uncle's to stay for a little while." -
"What should he go for?" said the father, "and without bidding me
good-bye, too!" - "Oh, he wanted to go so much, and he asked me to let
him stay there six weeks; he will be well taken care of." - "Dear
me," said the father, "I am quite sad about it; it was not right of
him to go without bidding me good-bye." With that he began to eat,
saying, "Marjory, what are you crying for? Your brother will come back
some time." After a while he said, "Well, wife, the food is very good;
give me some more." And the more he ate the more he wanted, until he
had eaten it all up, and be threw the bones under the table. Then
Marjory went to her chest of drawers, and took one of her best
handkerchiefs from the bottom drawer, and picked up all the bones from
under the table and tied them up in her handkerchief, and went out at
the door crying bitterly. She laid them in the green grass under the
almond tree, and immediately her heart grew light again, and she wept no
more. Then the almond tree began to wave to and fro, and the boughs drew
together and then parted, just like a clapping of hands for joy; then a
cloud rose from the tree, and in the midst of the cloud there burned a
fire, and out of the fire a beautiful bird arose, and, singing most
sweetly, soared high into the air; and when he had flown away, the
almond tree remained as it was before, but the handkerchief full of
bones was gone. Marjory felt quite glad and light-hearted, just as if
her brother were still alive. So she went back merrily into the house
and had her dinner. The bird, when it flew away, perched on the roof of
a goldsmith's house, and began to sing,

''It was my mother who murdered me;
It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
hem in a handkerchief she bound,
And laid them under the almond tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

The goldsmith was sitting in his shop making a golden chain, and when he
heard the bird, who was sitting on his roof and singing, he started up
to go and look, and as he passed over his threshold he lost one of his
slippers; and he went into the middle of the street with a slipper on
one foot and-only a sock on the other; with his apron on, and the gold
chain in one hand and the pincers in the other; and so he stood in the
sunshine looking up at the bird. "Bird," said he, "how beautifully
you sing; do sing that piece over again." - "No," said the bird, "I
do not sing for nothing twice; if you will give me that gold chain I
will sing again." - "Very well," said the goldsmith, "here is the
gold chain; now do as you said." Down came the bird and took the gold
chain in his right claw, perched in front of the goldsmith, and sang,

"It was my mother who murdered me;
It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound,
And laid them under the almond tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

Then the bird flew to a shoemaker's, and perched on his roof, and sang,

"It was my mother who murdered me;
It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound,
And laid them under the almond tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

When the shoemaker heard, he ran out of his door in his shirt sleeves
and looked up at the roof of his house, holding his hand to shade his
eyes from the sun. "Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing!" Then
he called in at his door, "Wife, come out directly; here is a bird
singing beautifully; only listen." Then he called his daughter, all his
children, and acquaintance, both young men and maidens, and they came up
the street and gazed on the bird, and saw how beautiful it was with red
and green feathers, and round its throat was as it were gold, and its
eyes twinkled in its head like stars. "Bird," said the shoemaker, "do
sing that piece over again." - "No," said the bird, "I may not sing
for nothing twice; you must give me something." - "Wife," said the
man, "go into the shop; on the top shelf stands a pair of red shoes;
bring them here." So the wife went and brought the shoes. "Now bird,"
said the man, "sing us that piece again." And the bird came down and
took the shoes in his left claw, and flew up again to the roof, and
sang,

"It was my mother who murdered me;
It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
hem in a handkerchief she bound,
And laid them under the almond tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I ciy,
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished he flew away, with the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left claw, and he flew till he reached a mill, and
the mill went "clip-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap." And in the mill sat
twenty millers-men hewing a millstone- "hick-hack, hick-hack,
hick-hack," while the mill was going "clip-clap, clip-clap,
clip-clap." And the bird perched on a linden tree that stood in front
of the mill, and sang, "It was my mother who murdered me; " Here one
of the men looked up. "It was my father who ate of me;" Then two more
looked up and listened. "It was my sister Marjory " Here four more
looked up. "Who all my bones in pieces found; Them in a handkerchief
she bound," Now there were only eight left hewing. "And laid them
under the almond tree." Now only five. "Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I
cry," Now only one. "Oh what a beautiful bird am I!" At length the
last one left off, and he only heard the end. "Bird," said he, "how
beautifully you sing; let me hear it all; sing that again!" - "No,"
said the bird, "I may not sing it twice for nothing; if you will give
me the millstone I will sing it again." - "Indeed," said the man,
"if it belonged to me alone you should have it." - "All right," said
the others, "if he sings again he shall have it." Then the bird came
down, and all the twenty millers heaved up the stone with poles - "yo!
heave-ho! yo! heave-ho!" and the bird stuck his head through the hole
in the middle, and with the millstone round his neck he flew up to the
tree and sang,

"It was my mother who murdered me;
It was my father who ate of me;
It was my sister Marjory
Who all my bones in pieces found;
Them in a handkerchief she bound,
And laid them under the almond tree.
Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished, he spread his wings,, having in the right claw
the chain, and in the left claw the shoes, and round his neck the
millstone, and he flew away to his father's house.

In the parlour sat the father, the mother, and Marjory at the table; the
father said, "How light-hearted and cheerful I feel." - "Nay," said
the mother, "I feel very low, just as if a great storm were coming."
But Marjory sat weeping; and the bird came flying, and perched on the
roof "Oh," said the father, "I feel so joyful, and the sun is shining
so bright; it is as if I were going to meet with an old friend." -
"Nay," said the wife, "I am terrified, my teeth chatter, and there is
fire in my veins," and she tore open her dress to get air; and Marjory
sat in a corner and wept, with her plate before her, until it was quite
full of tears. Then the bird perched on the almond tree, and sang, ''
It was my mother who murdered me; " And the mother stopped her ears and
hid her eyes, and would neither see nor hear; nevertheless, the noise of
a fearful storm was in her ears, and in her eyes a quivering and burning
as of lightning. "It was my father who ate of me;'' "O mother!"
said the-father, "there is a beautiful bird singing so finely, and the
sun shines, and everything smells as sweet as cinnamon. ''It was my
sister Marjory " Marjory hid her face in her lap and wept, and the
father said, "I must go out to see the bird." - "Oh do not go!" said
the wife, "I feel as if the house were on fire." But the man went out
and looked at the bird. "Who all my bones in pieces found; Them in a
handkerchief she bound, And laid them under the almond tree. Kywitt,
kywitt, kywitt, I cry, Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

With that the bird let fall the gold chain upon his father's neck, and
it fitted him exactly. So he went indoors and said, "Look what a
beautiful chain the bird has given me." Then his wife was so terrified
that she fell all along on the floor, and her cap came off. Then the
bird began again to sing, "It was my mother who murdered me;" -
"Oh," groaned the mother, "that I were a thousand fathoms under
ground, so as not to be obliged to hear it." - "It was my father who
ate of me;" Then the woman lay as if she were dead. "It was my sister
Marjory " - "Oh," said Marjory, "I will go out, too, and see if the
bird will give me anything." And so she went. "Who all my bones in
pieces found; Them in a handkerchief she bound," Then he threw the
shoes down to her. "And laid them under the almond tree. Kywitt,
kywitt, kywitt, I cry, Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And poor Marjory all at once felt happy and joyful, and put on her red
shoes, and danced and jumped for joy. "Oh dear," said she, "I felt so
sad before I went outside, and now my heart is so light! He is a
charming bird to have given me a pair of red shoes." But the mother's
hair stood on end, and looked like flame, and she said, "Even if the
world is coming to an end, I must go out for a little relief." Just as
she came outside the door, crash went the millstone on her head, and
crushed her flat. The father and daughter rushed out, and saw smoke and
flames of fire rise up; but when that had gone by, there stood the
little brother; and he took his father and Marjory by the hand, and they
felt very happy and content, and went indoors, and sat to the table, and
had their dinner.
