# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/rumpelstiltskin
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Rumpelstiltskin 

There was once a miller who was poor, but he had one beautiful daughter.
It happened one day that he came to speak with the king, and, to give
himself consequence, he told him that he had a daughter who could spin
gold out of straw. The king said to the miller: "That is an art that
pleases me well; if thy daughter is as clever as you say, bring her to
my castle to-morrow, that I may put her to the proof."

When the girl was brought to him, he led her into a room that was quite
full of straw, and gave her a wheel and spindle, and said: "Now set to
work, and if by the early morning thou hast not spun this straw to gold
thou shalt die." And he shut the door himself, and left her there
alone. And so the poor miller's daughter was left there sitting, and
could not think what to do for her life: she had no notion how to set to
work to spin gold from straw, and her distress grew so great that she
began to weep. Then all at once the door opened, and in came a little
man, who said: "Good evening, miller's daughter; why are you crying?"

"Oh!" answered the girl, "I have got to spin gold out of straw, and I
don't understand the business." Then the little man said: "What will
you give me if I spin it for you?" - "My necklace," said the girl.
The little man took the necklace, seated himself before the wheel, and
whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round and the bobbin was full; then he
took up another, and whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round, and that
was full; and so he went on till the morning, when all the straw had
been spun, and all the bobbins were full of gold.

At sunrise came the king, and when he saw the gold he was astonished and
very much rejoiced, for he was very avaricious. He had the miller's
daughter taken into another room filled with straw, much bigger than the
last, and told her that as she valued her life she must spin it all in
one night. The girl did not know what to do, so she began to cry, and
then the door opened, and the little man appeared and said: "What will
you give me if I spin all this straw into gold?"

"The ring from my finger," answered the girl. So the little man took
the ring, and began again to send the wheel whirring round, and by the
next morning all the straw was spun into glistening gold. The king was
rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but as he could never have enough
of gold, he had the miller's daughter taken into a still larger room
full of straw, and said: "This, too, must be spun in one night, and if
you accomplish it you shall be my wife." For he thought: "Although she
is but a miller's daughter, I am not likely to find any one richer in
the whole world." As soon as the girl was left alone, the little man
appeared for the third time and said: "What will you give me if I spin
the straw for you this time?" - "I have nothing left to give,"
answered the girl. "Then you must promise me the first child you have
after you are queen," said the little man. "But who knows whether that
will happen?" thought the girl; but as she did not know what else to do
in her necessity, she promised the little man what he desired, upon
which he began to spin, until all the straw was gold. And when in the
morning the king came and found all done according to his wish, he
caused the wedding to be held at once, and the miller's pretty daughter
became a queen.

In a year's time she brought a fine child into the world, and thought
no more of the little man; but one day he came suddenly into her room,
and said: "Now give me what you promised me." The queen was terrified
greatly, and offered the little man all the riches of the kingdom if he
would only leave the child; but the little man said: "No, I would
rather have something living than all the treasures of the world." Then
the queen began to lament and to weep, so that the little man had pity
upon her. "I will give you three days," said he, "and if at the end
of that time you cannot tell my name, you must give up the child to
me."

Then the queen spent the whole night in thinking over all the names that
she had ever heard, and sent a messenger through the land to ask far and
wide for all the names that could be found. And when the little man came
next day, (beginning with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar) she repeated all
she knew, and went through the whole list, but after each the little man
said: "That is not my name." The second day the queen sent to inquire
of all the neighbours what the servants were called, and told the little
man all the most unusual and singular names, saying: "Perhaps you are
called Roast-ribs, or Sheepshanks, or Spindleshanks?" But he answered
nothing but: "That is not my name."

The third day the messenger came back again, and said: "I have not been
able to find one single new name; but as I passed through the woods I
came to a high hill, and near it was a little house, and before the
house burned a fire, and round the fire danced a comical little man, and
he hopped on one leg and cried:

"Today do I bake,
tomorrow I brew,
The day after that the queen's child comes in;
And oh! I am glad that nobody knew
That the name I am called is Rumpelstiltskin!"

You cannot think how pleased the queen was to hear that name, and soon
afterwards, when the little man walked in and said: "Now, Mrs. Queen,
what is my name?" she said at first "Are you called Jack?" - "No,"
answered he. "Are you called Harry?" she asked again. "No," answered
he. And then she said": "Then perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin?"

"The devil told you that! the devil told you that!" cried the little
man, and in his anger he stamped with his right foot so hard that it
went into the ground above his knee; then he seized his left foot with
both his hands in such a fury that he split in two, and there was an end
of him.
