# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_old_woman_in_the_wood
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The old woman in the wood 

A poor servant-girl was once travelling with the family with which she
was in service, through a great forest, and when they were in the midst
of it, robbers came out of the thicket, and murdered all they found. All
perished together except the girl, who had jumped out of the carriage in
a fright, and hidden herself behind a tree. When the robbers had gone
away with their booty, she came out and beheld the great disaster. Then
she began to weep bitterly, and said, "What can a poor girl like me do
now? I do not know how to get out of the forest, no human being lives in
it, so I must certainly starve." She walked about and looked for a
road, but could find none. When it was evening she seated herself under
a tree, gave herself into God's keeping, and resolved to sit waiting
there and not go away, let what might happen. When, however, she had sat
there for a while, a white dove came flying to her with a little golden
key in its mouth. It put the little key in her hand, and said, "Dost
thou see that great tree, therein is a little lock, it opens with the
tiny key, and there thou wilt find food enough, and suffer no more
hunger." Then she went to the tree and opened it, and found milk in a
little dish, and white bread to break into it, so that she could eat her
fill. When she was satisfied, she said, "It is now the time when the
hens at home go to roost, I am so tired I could go to bed too." Then
the dove flew to her again, and brought another golden key in its bill,
and said, "Open that tree there, and thou willt find a bed." So she
opened it, and found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed God to
protect her during the night, and lay down and slept. In the morning the
dove came for the third time, and again brought a little key, and said,
"Open that tree there, and thou wilt find clothes." And when she
opened it, she found garments beset with gold and with jewels, more
splendid than those of any king's daughter. So she lived there for some
time, and the dove came every day and provided her with all she needed,
and it was a quiet good life.
Once, however, the dove came and said, "Wilt thou do something for my
sake?" - "With all my heart," said the girl. Then said the little
dove, "I will guide thee to a small house; enter it, and inside it, an
old woman will be sitting by the fire and will say, 'Good-day.' But on
thy life give her no answer, let her do what she will, but pass by her
on the right side; further on, there is a door, which open, and thou
wilt enter into a room where a quantity of rings of all kinds are lying,
amongst which are some magnificent ones with shining stones; leave them,
however, where they are, and seek out a plain one, which must likewise
be amongst them, and bring it here to me as quickly as thou canst." The
girl went to the little house, and came to the door. There sat an old
woman who stared when she saw her, and said, "Good-day my child." The
girl gave her no answer, and opened the door. "Whither away," cried
the old woman, and seized her by the gown, and wanted to hold her fast,
saying, "That is my house; no one can go in there if I choose not to
allow it." But the girl was silent, got away from her, and went
straight into the room. Now there lay on the table an enormous quantity
of rings, which gleamed and glittered before her eyes. She turned them
over and looked for the plain one, but could not find it. While she was
seeking, she saw the old woman and how she was stealing away, and
wanting to get off with a bird-cage which she had in her hand. So she
went after her and took the cage out of her hand, and when she raised it
up and looked into it, a bird was inside which had the plain ring in its
bill. Then she took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it, and
thought the little white dove would come and get the ring, but it did
not. Then she leant against a tree and determined to wait for the dove,
and, as she thus stood, it seemed just as if the tree was soft and
pliant, and was letting its branches down. And suddenly the branches
twined around her, and were two arms, and when she looked round, the
tree was a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her heartily, and said,
"Thou hast delivered me from the power of the old woman, who is a
wicked witch. She had changed me into a tree, and every day for two
hours I was a white dove, and so long as she possessed the ring I could
not regain my human form." Then his servants and his horses, who had
likewise been changed into trees, were freed from the enchantment also,
and stood beside him. And he led them forth to his kingdom, for he was a
King's son, and they married, and lived happily.
