# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/roland
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Roland 

There was once a woman who was a witch, and she had two daughters, one
ugly and wicked, whom she loved the best, because she was her very own
daughter, and one pretty and good, whom she hated because she was her
step-daughter.

One day the stepdaughter put on a pretty apron, which the other daughter
liked so much that she became envious, and said to her mother that she
must and should have the apron. "Be content, my child," said the old
woman, "thou shalt have it. Thy step-sister has long deserved death,
and tonight, while she is asleep, I shall come and cut off her head.
Take care to lie at the farthest side of the bed, and push her to the
outside."

And it would have been all over with the poor girl, if she had not been
standing in a corner near and heard it all. She did not dare to go
outside the door the whole day long, and when bed-time came the other
one got into bed first, so as to lie on the farthest side; but when she
had gone to sleep, the step-daughter pushed her towards the outside, and
took the inside place next the wall. In the night the old woman came
sneaking; in her right hand she held an axe, and with her left she felt
for the one who was lying outside, and then she heaved up the axe with
both hands, and hewed the head off her only daughter. When she had gone
away, the other girl got up and went to her sweetheart's, who was
called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came to her, she said,
"Listen, dear Roland, we must flee away in all haste; my step-mother
meant to put me to death, but she has killed her only child instead.
When the day breaks, and she sees what she has done, we are lost."

"But I advise you," said Roland, "to bring away her magic wand with
you; otherwise we cannot escape her when she comes after to overtake
us." So the maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took up the head of
her step-sister and let drop three drops of blood on the ground, - one
by the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the steps. Then she hastened
back to her sweetheart.

When the old witch got up in the morning, she called out to her
daughter, to give her the apron, but no daughter came. Then she cried
out, "Where art thou?"

"Here, at the steps, sweeping!" answered one of the drops of Wood. The
old woman went out, but she saw nobody at the steps, and cried again,
"Where art thou?"

"Here in the .kitchen warming myself," cried the second drop of blood.
So she went into the kitchen and found no one. Then she cried again,
"Where art thou?"

"Oh, here in bed fast asleep!" cried the third drop of blood. Then the
mother went into the room, and up to the bed, and there lay her only
child, whose head she had cut off herself.

The witch fell into a great fury, rushed to the window, for from it she
could see far and wide, and she caught sight of her step-daughter,
hastening away with her dear Roland. "It will be no good to you,"
cried she, "if you get ever so far away, you cannot escape me."

Then she put on her boots, which took her an hour's walk at every
stride, and it was not long before she had overtaken them. But the
maiden, when she saw the old woman striding up, changed, by means of the
magic wand, her dear Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming upon it. The witch stood on the bank and threw in crumbs of
bread, and took great pains to decoy the duck towards her, but the duck
would not be decoyed, and the old woman was obliged to go back in the
evening disappointed.

Then the maiden and her dear Roland took again their natural shapes, and
travelled on the whole night through until daybreak. Then the maiden
changed herself into a beautiful flower, standing in the middle of a
hedge of thorns, and her dear Roland into a fiddle-player. It was not
long before the witch came striding up, and she said to the musician,
"Dear musician, will you be so kind as to reach that pretty flower for
me?" - "Oh yes," said he, "I will strike up a tune to it." Then as
she crept quickly up to the hedge to break off the flower, for she knew
well who it was, he began to play, and whether she liked it or not, she
was obliged to dance, for there was magic in the tune. The faster he
played the higher she had to jump, and the thorns tore her clothes, and
scratched and wounded her, and he did not cease playing until she was
spent, and lay dead.

So now they were saved, and Roland said, "I will go to my father and
prepare for the wedding." - "And I will stay here," said the maiden,
"and wait for you, and so that no one should know me, I will change
myself into a red milestone." So away went Roland, and the maiden in
the likeness of a stone waited in the field for her beloved.

But when Roland went home he fell into the snares of another maiden, who
wrought so, that he forgot his first love. And the poor girl waited a
long time, but at last, seeing that he did not come, she was filled with
despair, and changed herself into a flower, thinking "Perhaps some one
in passing will put his foot upon me and crush me."

But it happened that a shepherd, tending his flock, saw the flower, and
as it was so beautiful, he gathered it, took it home with him, and put
it in his chest. From that time everything went wonderfully well in the
shepherd's house. When he got up in the morning, all the work was
already done; the room was swept, the tables and benches rubbed, fire
kindled on the hearth, and water ready drawn; and when he came home in
the middle of the day, the table was laid, and a good meal spread upon
it. He could not understand how it was done, for he never saw anybody in
his house, and it was too little for anybody to hide in. The good
serving pleased him well; but in the end he became uneasy, and went to a
wise woman to take counsel of her. The wise woman said, "There is magic
in it: get up early some morning, and if you hear something moving in
the room, be it what it may, throw a white cloth over it, and the charm
will be broken." The shepherd did as she told him, and the next morning
at daybreak he saw the chest open, and the flower come out.

Then he jumped up quickly and threw a white cloth over it. So the spell
was broken, and a lovely maiden stood before him; and she told him that
she had been the flower, and had until now cared for his household
matters. She told him all that had happened to her, and she pleased him
so much that he asked her to marry him, but she answered "No," because
she still remained true to her dear Roland, though he had forsaken her;
but she promised not to leave the shepherd, but to go on taking care of
his house.

Now the time came when Roland's wedding was to be held; and there was
an old custom in that country that all the girls should be present, and
should sing in honour of the bride and bridegroom. The faithful maiden,
when she knew this, was so sorrowful that she felt as if her heart would
break; and she would not go, until the others came and fetched her. And
when her turn came to sing she slipped behind, so that she stood alone,
and so began to sing.

And as soon as her song reached Roland's ear he sprang up and cried,
"I know that voice! that is the right bride, and no other will I
have." And everything that he had forgotten, and that had been swept
out of his mind, came suddenly home to him in his heart. And the
faithful maiden was married to her dear Roland; her sorrow came to an
end and her joy began.
