# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_girl_without_hands
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The girl without hands 

A certain miller had little by little fallen into poverty, and had
nothing left but his mill and a large apple-tree behind it. Once when he
had gone into the forest to fetch wood, an old man stepped up to him
whom he had never seen before, and said, "Why dost thou plague thyself
with cutting wood, I will make thee rich, if thou wilt promise me what
is standing behind thy mill?" - "What can that be but my apple-tree?"
thought the miller, and said, "Yes," and gave a written promise to the
stranger. He, however, laughed mockingly and said, "When three years
have passed, I will come and carry away what belongs to me," and then
he went. When the miller got home, his wife came to meet him and said,
"Tell me, miller, from whence comes this sudden wealth into our house?
All at once every box and chest was filled; no one brought it in, and I
know not how it happened." He answered, "It comes from a stranger who
met me in the forest, and promised me great treasure. I, in return, have
promised him what stands behind the mill; we can very well give him the
big apple-tree for it." - "Ah, husband," said the terrified wife,
"that must have been the devil! He did not mean the apple-tree, but our
daughter, who was standing behind the mill sweeping the yard."

The miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl, and lived through
the three years in the fear of God and without sin. When therefore the
time was over, and the day came when the Evil-one was to fetch her, she
washed herself clean, and made a circle round herself with chalk. The
devil appeared quite early, but he could not come near to her. Angrily,
he said to the miller, "Take all water away from her, that she may no
longer be able to wash herself, for otherwise I have no power over
her." The miller was afraid, and did so. The next morning the devil
came again, but she had wept on her hands, and they were quite clean.
Again he could not get near her, and furiously said to the miller, "Cut
her hands off, or else I cannot get the better of her." The miller was
shocked and answered, "How could I cut off my own child's hands?"
Then the Evil-one threatened him and said, "If thou dost not do it thou
art mine, and I will take thee thyself." The father became alarmed, and
promised to obey him. So he went to the girl and said, "My child, if I
do not cut off both thine hands, the devil will carry me away, and in my
terror I have promised to do it. Help me in my need, and forgive me the
harm I do thee." She replied, "Dear father, do with me what you will,
I am your child." Thereupon she laid down both her hands, and let them
be cut off. The devil came for the third time, but she had wept so long
and so much on the stumps, that after all they were quite clean. Then he
had to give in, and had lost all right over her.

The miller said to her, "I have by means of thee received such great
wealth that I will keep thee most delicately as long as thou livest."
But she replied, "Here I cannot stay, I will go forth, compassionate
people will give me as much as I require." Thereupon she caused her
maimed arms to be bound to her back, and by sunrise she set out on her
way, and walked the whole day until night fell. Then she came to a royal
garden, and by the shimmering of the moon she saw that trees covered
with beautiful fruits grew in it, but she could not enter, for there was
much water round about it. And as she had walked the whole day and not
eaten one mouthful, and hunger tormented her, she thought, "Ah, if I
were but inside, that I might eat of the fruit, else must I die of
hunger!" Then she knelt down, called on God the Lord, and prayed. And
suddenly an angel came towards her, who made a dam in the water, so that
the moat became dry and she could walk through it. And now she went into
the garden and the angel went with her. She saw a tree covered with
beautiful pears, but they were all counted. Then she went to them, and
to still her hunger, ate one with her mouth from the tree, but no more.
The gardener was watching; but as the angel was standing by, he was
afraid and thought the maiden was a spirit, and was silent, neither did
he dare to cry out, or to speak to the spirit. When she had eaten the
pear, she was satisfied, and went and concealed herself among the
bushes. The King to whom the garden belonged, came down to it next
morning, and counted, and saw that one of the pears was missing, and
asked the gardener what had become of it, as it was not lying beneath
the tree, but was gone. Then answered the gardener, "Last night, a
spirit came in, who had no hands, and ate off one of the pears with its
mouth." The King said, "How did the spirit get over the water, and
where did it go after it had eaten the pear?" The gardener answered,
"Some one came in a snow-white garment from heaven who made a dam, and
kept back the water, that the spirit might walk through the moat. And as
it must have been an angel, I was afraid, and asked no questions, and
did not cry out. When the spirit had eaten the pear, it went back
again." The King said, "If it be as thou sayest, I will watch with
thee to-night."

When it grew dark the King came into the garden and brought a priest
with him, who was to speak to the spirit. All three seated themselves
beneath the tree and watched. At midnight the maiden came creeping out
of the thicket, went to the tree, and again ate one pear off it with her
mouth, and beside her stood the angel in white garments. Then the priest
went out to them and said, "Comest thou from heaven or from earth? Art
thou a spirit, or a human being?" She replied, "I am no spirit, but an
unhappy mortal deserted by all but God." The King said, "If thou art
forsaken by all the world, yet will I not forsake thee." He took her
with him into his royal palace, and as she was so beautiful and good, he
loved her with all his heart, had silver hands made for her, and took
her to wife.

After a year the King had to take the field, so he commended his young
Queen to the care of his mother and said, "If she is brought to bed
take care of her, nurse her well, and tell me of it at once in a
letter." Then she gave birth to a fine boy. So the old mother made
haste to write and announce the joyful news to him. But the messenger
rested by a brook on the way, and as he was fatigued by the great
distance, he fell asleep. Then came the Devil, who was always seeking to
injure the good Queen, and exchanged the letter for another, in which
was written that the Queen had brought a monster into the world. When
the King read the letter he was shocked and much troubled, but he wrote
in answer that they were to take great care of the Queen and nurse her
well until his arrival. The messenger went back with the letter, but
rested at the same place and again fell asleep. Then came the Devil once
more, and put a different letter in his pocket, in which it was written
that they were to put the Queen and her child to death. The old mother
was terribly shocked when she received the letter, and could not believe
it. She wrote back again to the King, but received no other answer,
because each time the Devil substituted a false letter, and in the last
letter it was also written that she was to preserve the Queen's tongue
and eyes as a token that she had obeyed.

But the old mother wept to think such innocent blood was to be shed, and
had a hind brought by night and cut out her tongue and eyes, and kept
them. Then said she to the Queen, "I cannot have thee killed as the
King commands, but here thou mayst stay no longer. Go forth into the
wide world with thy child, and never come here again." The poor woman
tied her child on her back, and went away with eyes full of tears. She
came into a great wild forest, and then she fell on her knees and prayed
to God, and the angel of the Lord appeared to her and led her to a
little house on which was a sign with the words, "Here all dwell
free." A snow-white maiden came out of the little house and said,
'Welcome, Lady Queen," and conducted her inside. Then they unbound the
little boy from her back, and held him to her breast that he might feed,
and laid him in a beautifully-made little bed. Then said the poor woman,
"From whence knowest thou that I was a queen?" The white maiden
answered, "I am an angel sent by God, to watch over thee and thy
child." The Queen stayed seven years in the little house, and was well
cared for, and by God's grace, because of her piety, her hands which
had been cut off, grew once more.

At last the King came home again from the war, and his first wish was to
see his wife and the child. Then his aged mother began to weep and said,
"Thou wicked man, why didst thou write to me that I was to take those
two innocent lives?" and she showed him the two letters which the
Evil-one had forged, and then continued, "I did as thou badest me,"
and she showed the tokens, the tongue and eyes. Then the King began to
weep for his poor wife and his little son so much more bitterly than she
was doing, that the aged mother had compassion on him and said, "Be at
peace, she still lives; I secretly caused a hind to be killed, and took
these tokens from it; but I bound the child to thy wife's back and bade
her go forth into the wide world, and made her promise never to come
back here again, because thou wert so angry with her." Then spoke the
King, "I will go as far as the sky is blue, and will neither eat nor
drink until I have found again my dear wife and my child, if in the
meantime they have not been killed, or died of hunger."

Thereupon the King travelled about for seven long years, and sought her
in every cleft of the rocks and in every cave, but he found her not, and
thought she had died of want. During the whole of this time he neither
ate nor drank, but God supported him. At length he came into a great
forest, and found therein the little house whose sign was, "Here all
dwell free." Then forth came the white maiden, took him by the hand,
led him in, and said, "Welcome, Lord King," and asked him from whence
he came. He answered, "Soon shall I have travelled about for the space
of seven years, and I seek my wife and her child, but cannot find
them." The angel offered him meat and drink, but he did not take
anything, and only wished to rest a little. Then he lay down to sleep,
and put a handkerchief over his face.

Thereupon the angel went into the chamber where the Queen sat with her
son, whom she usually called "Sorrowful," and said to her, "Go out
with thy child, thy husband hath come." So she went to the place where
he lay, and the handkerchief fell from his face. Then said she,
"Sorrowful, pick up thy father's handkerchief, and cover his face
again." The child picked it up, and put it over his face again. The
King in his sleep heard what passed, and had pleasure in letting the
handkerchief fall once more. But the child grew impatient, and said,
"Dear mother, how can I cover my father's face when I have no father
in this world? I have learnt to say the prayer, 'Our Father, which art
in Heaven,' thou hast told me that my father was in Heaven, and was the
good God, and how can I know a wild man like this? He is not my
father." When the King heard that, he got up, and asked who they were.
Then said she, "I am thy wife, and that is thy son, Sorrowful." And he
saw her living hands, and said, "My wife had silver hands." She
answered, "The good God has caused my natural hands to grow again;"
and the angel went into the inner room, and brought the silver hands,
and showed them to him. Hereupon he knew for a certainty that it was his
dear wife and his dear child, and he kissed them, and was glad, and
said, "A heavy stone has fallen from off mine heart." Then the angel
of God gave them one meal with her, and after that they went home to the
King's aged mother. There were great rejoicings everywhere, and the
King and Queen were married again, and lived contentedly to their happy
end.
