# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/hans_the_hedgehog
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Hans my hedgehog 

There was once a countryman who had money and land in plenty, but how
rich soever he was, one thing was still wanting in his happiness he had
no children. Often when he went into the town with the other peasants
they mocked him and asked why he had no children. At last he became
angry, and when he got home he said, "I will have a child, even if it
be a hedgehog." Then his wife had a child, that was a hedgehog in the
upper part of his body, and a boy in the lower, and when she saw the
child, she was terrified, and said, "See, there thou hast brought
ill-luck on us." Then said the man, "What can be done now? The boy
must be christened, but we shall not be able to get a godfather for
him." The woman said, "And we cannot call him anything else but
Hans-my-Hedgehog." When he was christened, the parson said, "He cannot
go into any ordinary bed because of his spikes." So a little straw was
put behind the stove, and Hans-my-Hedgehog was laid on it. His mother
could not suckle him, for he would have pricked her with his quills. So
he lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was tired
of him and thought, "If he would but die!" He did not die, however,
but remained lying there. Now it happened that there was a fair in the
town, and the peasant was about to go to it, and asked his wife what he
should bring back with him for her. "A little meat and a couple of
white rolls which are wanted for the house," said she. Then he asked
the servant, and she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with
clocks. At last he said also, "And what wilt thou have, Hans my
Hedgehog?" - "Dear father," he said, "do bring me bagpipes." When,
therefore, the father came home again, he gave his wife what he had
bought for her; meat and white rolls, and then he gave the maid the
slippers, and the stockings with clocks; and, lastly, he went behind the
stove, and gave Hans-my-Hedgehog the bagpipes. And when Hans-my-Hedgehog
had the bagpipes, he said, "Dear father, do go to the forge and get the
cock shod, and then I will ride away, and never come back again." On
this, the father was delighted to think that he was going to get rid of
him, and had the cock shod for him, and when it was done,
Hans-my-Hedgehog got on it, and rode away, but took swine and asses with
him which he intended to keep in the forest. When they got there he made
the cock fly on to a high tree with him, and there he sat for many a
long year, and watched his asses and swine until the herd was quite
large, and his father knew nothing about him. While he was sitting in
the tree, however, he played his bagpipes, and made music which was very
beautiful. Once a King came travelling by who had lost his way and heard
the music. He was astonished at it, and sent his servant forth to look
all round and see from whence this music came. He spied about, but saw
nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree, which looked
like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music. Then the King
told the servant he was to ask why he sat there, and if he knew the road
which led to his kingdom. So Hans-my-Hedgehog descended from the tree,
and said he would show the way if the King would write a bond and
promise him whatever he first met in the royal courtyard as soon as he
arrived at home. Then the King thought, "I can easily do that,
Hans-my-Hedgehog understands nothing, and I can write what I like." So
the King took pen and ink and wrote something, and when he had done it,
Hans-my-Hedgehog showed him the way, and he got safely home. But his
daughter, when she saw him from afar, was so overjoyed that she ran to
meet him, and kissed him. Then he remembered Hans-my-Hedgehog, and told
her what had happened, and that he had been forced to promise whatsoever
first met him when he got home, to a very strange animal which sat on a
cock as if it were a horse, and made beautiful music, but that instead
of writing that he should have what he wanted, he had written that he
should not have it. Thereupon the princess was glad, and said he had
done well, for she never would have gone away with the Hedgehog.

Hans-my-Hedgehog, however, looked after his asses and pigs, and was
always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes. Now it came to
pass that another King came journeying by with his attendants and
runners, and he also had lost his way, and did not know how to get home
again because the forest was so large. He likewise heard the beautiful
music from a distance, and asked his runner what that could be, and told
him to go and see. Then the runner went under the tree, and saw the cock
sitting at the top of it, and Hans-my-Hedgehog on the cock. The runner
asked him what he was about up there? "I am keeping my asses and my
pigs; but what is your desire?" The messenger said that they had lost
their way, and could not get back into their own kingdom, and asked if
he would not show them the way. Then Hans-my-Hedgehog got down the tree
with the cock, and told the aged King that he would show him the way, if
he would give him for his own whatsoever first met him in front of his
royal palace. The King said, "Yes," and wrote a promise to
Hans-my-Hedgehog that he should have this. That done, Hans rode on
before him on the cock, and pointed out the way, and the King reached
his kingdom again in safety. When he got to the courtyard, there were
great rejoicings. Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful;
she ran to meet him, threw her arms round his neck, and was delighted to
have her old father back again. She asked him where in the world he had
been so long. So he told her how he had lost his way, and had very
nearly not come back at all, but that as he was travelling through a
great forest, a creature, half hedgehog, half man, who was sitting
astride a cock in a high tree, and making music, had shown him the way
and helped him to get out, but that in return he had promised him
whatsoever first met him in the royal court-yard, and how that was she
herself, which made him unhappy now. But on this she promised that, for
love of her father, she would willingly go with this Hans if he came.

Hans-my-Hedgehog, however, took care of his pigs, and the pigs
multiplied until they became so many in number that the whole forest was
filled with them. Then Hans-my-Hedgehog resolved not to live in the
forest any longer, and sent word to his father to have every stye in the
village emptied, for he was coming with such a great herd that all might
kill who wished to do so. When his father heard that, he was troubled,
for he thought Hans-my-Hedgehog had died long ago. Hans-my-Hedgehog,
however, seated himself on the cock, and drove the pigs before him into
the village, and ordered the slaughter to begin. Ha! but there was a
killing and a chopping that might have been heard two miles off! After
this Hans-my-Hedgehog said, "Father, let me have the cock shod once
more at the forge, and then I will ride away and never come back as long
as I live." Then the father had the cock shod once more, and was
pleased that Hans-my-Hedgehog would never return again.

Hans-my-Hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom. There the King had
commanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes with
him should be shot at, cut down, or stabbed by everyone, so that he
might not enter the palace. When, therefore, Hans-my-Hedgehog came
riding thither, they all pressed forward against him with their pikes,
but he spurred the cock and it flew up over the gate in front of the
King's window and lighted there, and Hans cried that the King must give
him what he had promised, or he would take both his life and his
daughter's. Then the King began to speak his daughter fair, and to beg
her to go away with Hans in order to save her own life and her
father's. So she dressed herself in white, and her father gave her a
carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants together with gold
and possessions. She seated herself in the carriage, and placed
Hans-my-Hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes, and then
they took leave and drove away, and the King thought he should never see
her again. He was however, deceived in his expectation, for when they
were at a short distance from the town, Hans-my-Hedgehog took her pretty
clothes off, and pierced her with his hedgehog's skin until she bled
all over. "That is the reward of your falseness," said he. "go your
way, I will not have you!" and on that he chased her home again, and
she was disgraced for the rest of her life.

Hans-my-Hedgehog, however, rode on further on the cock, with his
bagpipes, to the dominions of the second King to whom he had shown the
way. This one, however, had arranged that if any one resembling
Hans-my-Hedgehog should come, they were to present arms, give him safe
conduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to the royal palace. But
when the King's daughter saw him she was terrified, for he looked quite
too strange. She remembered however, that she could not change her mind,
for she had given her promise to her father. So Hans-my-Hedgehog was
welcomed by her, and married to her, and had to go with her to the royal
table, and she seated herself by his side, and they ate and drank. When
the evening came and they wanted to go to sleep, she was afraid of his
quills, but he told her she was not to fear, for no harm would befall
her, and he told the old King that he was to appoint four men to watch
by the door of the chamber, and light a great fire, and when he entered
the room and was about to get into bed, he would creep out of his
hedgehog's skin and leave it lying there by the bedside, and that the
men were to run nimbly to it, throw it in the fire, and stay by it until
it was consumed. When the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber,
stripped off the hedgehog's skin, and left it lying by the bed. Then
came the men and fetched it swiftly, and threw it in the fire; and when
the fire had consumed it, he was delivered, and lay there in bed in
human form, but he was coal-black as if he had been burnt. The King sent
for his physician who washed him with precious salves, and anointed him,
and he became white, and was a handsome young man. When the King's
daughter saw that she was glad, and the next morning they arose
joyfully, ate and drank, and then the marriage was properly solemnized,
and Hans-my-Hedgehog received the kingdom from the aged King.

When several years had passed he went with his wife to his father, and
said that he was his son. The father, however, declared he had no son he
had never had but one, and he had been born like a hedgehog with spikes,
and had gone forth into the world. Then Hans made himself known, and the
old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom.
