# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/tom_thumb
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Tom Thumb 

There was once a poor countryman who used to sit in the chimney-corner
all evening and poke the fire, while his wife sat at her spinning-wheel.
And he used to say, "How dull it is without any children about us; our
house is so quiet, and other people's houses so noisy and merry!" -
"Yes," answered his wife, and sighed, "if we could only have one, and
that one ever so little, no bigger than my thumb, how happy I should be!
It would, indeed, be having our heart's desire." Now, it happened that
after a while the woman had a child who was perfect in all his limbs,
but no bigger than a thumb. Then the parents said, "He is just what we
wished for, and we will love him very much," and they named him
according to his stature, "Tom Thumb." And though they gave him plenty
of nourishment, he grew no bigger, but remained exactly the same size as
when he was first born; and he had very good faculties, and was very
quick and prudent, so that all he did prospered.

One day his father made ready to go into the forest to cut wood, and he
said, as if to himself, "Now, I wish there was some one to bring the
cart to meet me." - "O father," cried Tom Thumb, "I can bring the
cart, let me alone for that, and in proper time, too!" Then the father
laughed, and said, "How will you manage that? You are much too little
to hold the reins." - "That has nothing to do with it, father; while
my mother goes on with her spinning I will sit in the horse's ear and
tell him where to go." - "Well," answered the father, "we will try
it for once." When it was time to set off, the mother went on spinning,
after setting Tom Thumb in the horse's ear; and so he drove off,
crying, "Gee-up, gee-wo!" So the horse went on quite as if his master
were driving him, and drew the waggon along the right road to the wood.
Now it happened just as they turned a corner, and the little fellow was
calling out "Gee-up!" that two strange men passed by. "Look," said
one of them, "how is this? There goes a waggon, and the driver is
calling to the horse, and yet he is nowhere to be seen." - "It is very
strange," said the other; "we will follow the waggon, and see where it
belongs." And the wagon went right through the wood, up to the place
where the wood had been hewed. When Tom Thumb caught sight of his
father, he cried out, "Look, father, here am I with the wagon; now,
take me down." The father held the horse with his left hand, and with
the right he lifted down his little son out of the horse's ear, and Tom
Thumb sat down on a stump, quite happy and content. When the two
strangers saw him they were struck dumb with wonder. At last one of
them, taking the other aside, said to him, "Look here, the little chap
would make our fortune if we were to show him in the town for money.
Suppose we buy him." So they went up to the woodcutter, and said,
"Sell the little man to us; we will take care he shall come to no
harm." - "No," answered the father; "he is the apple of my eye, and
not for all the money in the world would I sell him." But Tom Thumb,
when he heard what was going on, climbed up by his father's coat tails,
and, perching himself on his shoulder, he whispered in his ear,
"Father, you might as well let me go. I will soon come back again."
Then the father gave him up to the two men for a large piece of money.
They asked him where he would like to sit, "Oh, put me on the brim of
your hat," said he. "There I can walk about and view the country, and
be in no danger of falling off." So they did as he wished, and when Tom
Thumb had taken leave of his father, they set off all together. And they
travelled on until it grew dusk, and the little fellow asked to be set
down a little while for a change, and after some difficulty they
consented. So the man took him down from his hat, and set him in a field
by the roadside, and he ran away directly, and, after creeping about
among the furrows, he slipped suddenly into a mouse-hole, just what he
was looking for. "Good evening, my masters, you can go home without
me!"cried he to them, laughing. They ran up and felt about with their
sticks in the mouse-hole, but in vain. Tom Thumb crept farther and
farther in, and as it was growing dark, they had to make the best of
their way home, full of vexation, and with empty purses.

When Tom Thumb found they were gone, he crept out of his hiding-place
underground. "It is dangerous work groping about these holes in the
darkness," said he; "I might easily break my neck." But by good
fortune he came upon an empty snail shell. "That's all right," said
he. "Now I can get safely through the night;" and he settled himself
down in it. Before he had time to get to sleep, he heard two men pass
by, and one was saying to the other, "How can we manage to get hold of
the rich parson's gold and silver?" - "I can tell you how," cried
Tom Thumb. "How is this?" said one of the thieves, quite frightened,
"I hear some one speak!" So they stood still and listened, and Tom
Thumb spoke again. "Take me with you; I will show you how to do it!" -
"Where are you, then?" asked they. "Look about on the ground and
notice where the voice comes from," answered he. At last they found
him, and lifted him up. "You little elf," said they, "how can you
help us?" - "Look here," answered he, "I can easily creep between
the iron bars of the parson's room and hand out to you whatever you
would like to have." - "Very well," said they, ff we will try what
you can do." So when they came to the parsonage-house, Tom Thumb crept
into the room, but cried out with all his might, "Will you have all
that is here?" So the thieves were terrified, and said, "Do speak more
softly, lest any one should be awaked." But Tom Thumb made as if he did
not hear them, and cried out again, "What would you like? will you have
all that is here?" so that the cook, who was sleeping in a room hard
by, heard it, and raised herself in bed and listened. The thieves,
however, in their fear of being discovered, had run back part of the
way, but they took courage again, thinking that it was only a jest of
the little fellow's. So they came back and whispered to him to be
serious, and to hand them out something. Then Tom Thumb called out once
more as loud as he could, "Oh yes, I will give it all to you, only put
out your hands." Then the listening maid heard him distinctly that
time, and jumped out of bed, and burst open the door. The thieves ran
off as if the wild huntsman were behind them; but the maid, as she could
see nothing, went to fetch a light. And when she came back with one, Tom
Thumb had taken himself off, without being seen by her, into the barn;
and the maid, when she had looked in every hole and corner and found
nothing, went back to bed at last, and thought that she must have been
dreaming with her eyes and ears open.

So Tom Thumb crept among the hay, and found a comfortable nook to sleep
in, where he intended to remain until it was day, and then to go home to
his father and mother. But other things were to befall him; indeed,
there is nothing but trouble and worry in this world! The maid got up at
dawn of day to feed the cows. The first place she went to was the barn,
where she took up an armful of hay, and it happened to be the very heap
in which Tom Thumb lay asleep. And he was so fast asleep, that he was
aware of nothing, and never waked until he was in the mouth of the cow,
who had taken him up with the hay. "Oh dear," cried he, "how is it
that I have got into a mill!" but he soon found out where he was, and
he had to be very careful not to get between the cow's teeth, and at
last he had to descend into the cow's stomach. "The windows were
forgotten when this little room was built," said he, "and the sunshine
cannot get in; there is no light to be had." His quarters were in every
way unpleasant to him, and, what was the worst, new hay was constantly
coming in, and the space was being filled up. At last he cried out in
his extremity, as loud as he could, "No more hay for me! no more hay
for me!" The maid was then milking the cow, and as she heard a voice,
but could see no one, and as it was the same voice that she had heard in
the night, she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and spilt
the milk. Then she ran in great haste to her master, crying, "Oh,
master dear, the cow spoke!" - "You must be crazy," answered her
master, and he went himself to the cow-house to see what was the matter.
No sooner had he put his foot inside the door, than Tom Thumb cried out
again, "No more hay for me! no more hay for me!" Then the parson
himself was frightened, supposing that a bad spirit had entered into the
cow, and he ordered her to be put to death. So she was killed, but the
stomach, where Tom Thumb was lying, was thrown upon a dunghill. Tom
Thumb had great trouble to work his way out of it, and he had just made
a space big enough for his head to go through, when a new misfortune
happened. A hungry wolf ran up and swallowed the whole stomach at one
gulp. But Tom Thumb did not lose courage. "Perhaps," thought he, "the
wolf will listen to reason," and he cried out from the inside of the
wolf," My dear wolf, I can tell you where to get a splendid meal!" -
"Where is it to be had?" asked the wolf. "In such and such a house,
and you must creep into it through the drain, and there you will find
cakes and bacon and broth, as much as you can eat," and he described to
him his father's house. The wolf needed not to be told twice. He
squeezed himself through the drain in the night, and feasted in the
store-room to his heart's content. When, at last, he was satisfied, he
wanted to go away again, but he had become so big, that to creep the
same way back was impossible. This Tom Thumb had reckoned upon, and
began to make a terrible din inside the wolf, crying and calling as loud
as he could. "Will you be quiet?" said the wolf; "you will wake the
folks up!" - "Look here," cried the little man, "you are very well
satisfied, and now I will do something for my own enjoyment," and began
again to make all the noise he could. At last the father and mother were
awakened, and they ran to the room-door and peeped through the chink,
and when they saw a wolf in occupation, they ran and fetched weapons -
the man an axe, and the wife a scythe. "Stay behind," said the man, as
they entered the room; "when I have given him a blow, and it does not
seem to have killed him, then you must cut at him with your scythe."
Then Tom Thumb heard his father's voice, and cried, "Dear father; I am
here in the wolfs inside." Then the father called out full of joy,
"Thank heaven that we have found our dear child!" and told his wife to
keep the scythe out of the way, lest Tom Thumb should be hurt with it.
Then he drew near and struck the wolf such a blow on the head that he
fell down dead; and then" he fetched a knife and a pair of scissors,
slit up the wolf's body, and let out the little fellow. "Oh, what
anxiety we have felt about you!" said the father. "Yes, father, I have
seen a good deal of the world, and I am very glad to breathe fresh air
again." - "And where have you been all this time?" asked his father.
"Oh, I have been in a mouse-hole and a snail's shell, in a cow's
stomach and a wolfs inside: now, I think, I will stay at home." - "And
we will not part with you for all the kingdoms of the world," cried the
parents, as they kissed and hugged their dear little Tom Thumb. And they
gave him something to eat and drink, and a new suit of clothes, as his
old ones were soiled with travel.
