# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_golden_goose
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The golden goose 

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called the
Simpleton, and was despised, laughed at, and neglected, on every
occasion. It happened one day that the eldest son wished to go into the
forest to cut wood, and before he went his mother gave him a delicious
pancake and a flask of wine, that he might not suffer from hunger or
thirst. When he came into the forest a little old grey man met him, who
wished him good day, and said, "Give me a bit of cake out of your
pocket, and let me have a drink of your wine; I am so hungry and
thirsty." But the prudent youth answered, "Give you my cake and my
wine? I haven't got any; be off with you." And leaving the little man
standing there, he went off. Then he began to fell a tree, but he had
not been at it long before he made a wrong stroke, and the hatchet hit
him in the arm, so that he was obliged to go home and get it bound up.
That was what came of the little grey man.

Afterwards the second son went into the wood, and the mother gave to
him, as to the eldest, a pancake and a flask of wine. The little old
grey man met him also, and begged for a little bit of cake and a drink
of wine. But the second son spoke out plainly, saying, "What I give you
I lose myself, so be off with you." And leaving the little man standing
there, he went off. The punishment followed; as he was chopping away at
the tree, he hit himself in the leg so severely that he had to be
carried home.

Then said the Simpleton, "Father, let me go for once into the forest to
cut wood; and the father answered, "Your brothers have hurt themselves
by so doing; give it up, you understand nothing about it." But the
Simpleton went on begging so long, that the father said at last, "Well,
be off with you; you will only learn by experience." The mother gave
him a cake (it was only made with water, and baked in the ashes), and
with it a flask of sour beer. When he came into the forest the little
old grey man met him, and greeted him, saying, "Give me a bit of your
cake, and a drink from your flask; I am so hungry and thirsty." And the
Simpleton answered, "I have only a flour and water cake and sour beer;
but if that is good enough for you, let us sit down together and eat."
Then they sat down, and as the Simpleton took out his flour and water
cake it became a rich pancake, and his sour beer became good wine; then
they ate and drank, and afterwards the little man said, "As you have
such a kind heart, and share what you have so willingly, I will bestow
good luck upon you. Yonder stands an old tree; cut it down, and at its
roots you will find some thing," and thereupon the little man took his
departure.

The Simpleton went there, and hewed away at the tree, and when it fell
he saw, sitting among the roots, a goose with feathers of pure gold. He
lifted it out and took it with him to an inn where he intended to stay
the night. The landlord had three daughters who, when they saw the
goose, were curious to know what wonderful kind of bird it was, and
ended by longing for one of its golden feathers. The eldest thought, "I
will wait for a good opportunity, and then I will pull out one of its
feathers for myself;" and so, when the Simpleton was gone out, she
seized the goose by its wing - but there her finger and hand had to
stay, held fast. Soon after came the second sister with the same idea of
plucking out one of the golden feathers for herself; but scarcely had
she touched her sister, than she also was obliged to stay, held fast.
Lastly came the third with the same intentions; but the others screamed
out, "Stay away! for heaven's sake stay away!" But she did not see
why she should stay away, and thought, "If they do so, why should not
I?" and went towards them. But when she reached her sisters there she
stopped, hanging on with them. And so they had to stay, all night.

The next morning the Simpleton took the goose under his arm and went
away, unmindful of the three girls that hung on to it. The three had
always to run after him, left and right, wherever his legs carried him.
In the midst of the fields they met the parson, who, when he saw the
procession, said, "Shame on you, girls, running after a young fellow
through the fields like this," and forthwith he seized hold of the
youngest by the hand to drag her away, but hardly had he touched her
when he too was obliged to run after them himself. Not long after the
sexton came that way, and seeing the respected parson following at the
heels of the three girls, he called out, "Ho, your reverence, whither
away so quickly? You forget that we have another christening to-day,"
and he seized hold of him by his gown; but no sooner had he touched him
than he was obliged to follow on too. As the five tramped on, one after
another, two peasants with their hoes came up from the fields, and the
parson cried out to them, and begged them to come and set him and the
sexton free, but no sooner had they touched the sexton than they had to
follow on too; and now there were seven following the Simpleton and the
goose.

By and by they came to a town where a king reigned, who had an only
daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh; therefore
the king had given out that whoever should make her laugh should have
her in marriage. The Simpleton, when he heard this, went with his goose
and his hangers-on into the presence of the king's daughter, and as
soon as she saw the seven people following always one after the other,
she burst out laughing, and seemed as if she could never stop.

And so the Simpleton earned a right to her as his bride; but the king
did not like him for a son-in-law and made all kinds of objections, and
said he must first bring a man who could drink up a whole cellar of
wine. The Simpleton thought that the little grey man would be able to
help him, and went out into the forest, and there, on the very spot
where he felled the tree, he saw a man sitting with a very sad
countenance. The Simpleton asked him what was the matter, and he
answered, "I have a great thirst, which I cannot quench: cold water
does not agree with me; I have indeed drunk up a whole cask of wine, but
what good is a drop like that?" Then said the Simpleton, "I can help
you; only come with me, and you shall have enough." He took him
straight to the king's cellar, and the man sat himself down before the
big vats, and drank, and drank, and before a day was over he had drunk
up the whole cellar-full.

The Simpleton again asked for his bride, but the king was annoyed that a
wretched fellow, called the Simpleton by everybody, should carry off his
daughter, and so he made new conditions. He was to produce a man who
could eat up a mountain of bread. The Simpleton did not hesitate long,
but ran quickly off to the forest, and there in the same place sat a man
who had fastened a strap round his body, making a very piteous face, and
saying, "I have eaten a whole bakehouse full of rolls, but what is the
use of that when one is so hungry as I am? My stomach feels quite empty,
and I am obliged to strap myself together, that I may not die of
hunger." The Simpleton was quite glad of this, and said, "Get up
quickly, and come along with me, and you shall have enough to eat." He
led him straight to the king's courtyard, where all the meal in the
kingdom had been collected and baked into a mountain of bread. The man
out of the forest settled himself down before it and hastened to eat,
and in one day the whole mountain had disappeared. Then the Simpleton
asked for his bride the third time. The king, however, found one more
excuse, and said he must have a ship that should be able to sail on land
or on water. "So soon," said he, "as you come sailing along with it,
you shall have my daughter for your wife." The Simpleton went straight
to the forest, and there sat the little old grey man with whom he had
shared his cake, and he said, "I have eaten for you, and I have drunk
for you, I will also give you the ship; and all because you were kind to
me at the first." Then he gave him the ship that could sail on land and
on water, and when the king saw it he knew he could no longer withhold
his daughter.

The marriage took place immediately, and at the death of the king the
Simpleton possessed the kingdom, and lived long and happily with his
wife.
