# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/gambling_hansel
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Gambling Hansel 

Once upon a time there was a man who did nothing but gamble, and for
that reason people never called him anything but Gambling Hansel, and as
he never ceased to gamble, he played away his house and all that he had.
Now the very day before his creditors were to take his house from him,
came the Lord and St. Peter, and asked him to give them shelter for the
night. Then Gambling Hansel said, "For my part, you may stay the night,
but I cannot give you a bed or anything to eat." So the Lord said he
was just to take them in, and they themselves would buy something to
eat, to which Gambling Hansel made no objection. Thereupon St. Peter
gave him three groschen, and said he was to go to the baker's and fetch
some bread. So Gambling Hansel went, but when he reached the house where
the other gambling vagabonds were gathered together, they, although they
had won all that he had, greeted him clamorously, and said, "Hansel, do
come in." - "Oh," said he, "do you want to win the three groschen
too?" On this they would not let him go. So he went in, and played away
the three groschen also. Meanwhile St. Peter and the Lord were waiting,
and as he was so long in coming, they set out to meet him. When Gambling
Hansel came, however, he pretended that the money had fallen into the
gutter, and kept raking about in it all the while to find it, but our
Lord already knew that he had lost it in play. St. Peter again gave him
three groschen, and now he did not allow himself to be led away once
more, but fetched them the loaf. Our Lord then inquired if he had no
wine, and he said, "Alack, sir, the casks are all empty!" But the Lord
said he was to go down into the cellar, for the best wine was still
there. For a long time he would not believe this, but at length he said,
"Well, I will go down, but I know that there is none there." When he
turned the tap, however, lo and behold, the best of wine ran out! So he
took it to them, and the two passed the night there. Early next day our
Lord told Gambling Hansel that he might beg three favours. The Lord
expected that he would ask to go to Heaven; but Gambling Hansel asked
for a pack of cards with which he could win everything, for dice with
which he would win everything, and for a tree whereon every kind of
fruit would grow, and from which no one who had climbed up, could
descend until he bade him do so. The Lord gave him all that he had
asked, and departed with St. Peter.
And now Gambling Hansel at once set about gambling in real earnest, and
before long he had gained half the world. Upon this St. Peter said to
the Lord, "Lord, this thing must not go on, he will win, and thou lose,
the whole world. We must send Death to him." When Death appeared,
Gambling Hansel had just seated himself at the gaming-table, and Death
said, "Hansel, come out a while." But Gambling Hansel said, "Just
wait a little until the game is done, and in the meantime get up into
that tree out there, and gather a little fruit that we may have
something to munch on our way." Thereupon Death climbed up, but when he
wanted to come down again, he could not, and Gambling Hansel left him up
there for seven years, during which time no one died.

So St. Peter said to the Lord, "Lord, this thing must not go on. People
no longer die; we must go ourselves." And they went themselves, and the
Lord commanded Hansel to let Death come down. So Hansel went at once to
Death and said to him, "Come down," and Death took him directly and
put an end to him. They went away together and came to the next world,
and then Gambling Hansel made straight for the door of Heaven, and
knocked at it. "Who is there?" - "Gambling Hansel." - "Ah, we will
have nothing to do with him! Begone!" So he went to the door of
Purgatory, and knocked once more. "Who is there?" - "Gambling
Hansel." - "Ah, there is quite enough weeping and wailing here without
him. We do not want to gamble, just go away again." Then he went to the
door of Hell, and there they let him in. There was, however, no one at
home but old Lucifer and the crooked devils who had just been doing
their evil work in the world. And no sooner was Hansel there than he sat
down to gamble again. Lucifer, however, had nothing to lose, but his
mis-shapen devils, and Gambling Hansel won them from him, as with his
cards he could not fail to do. And now he was off again with his crooked
devils, and they went to Hohenfuert and pulled up a hop-pole, and with
it went to Heaven and began to thrust the pole against it, and Heaven
began to crack. So again St. Peter said, "Lord, this thing cannot go
on, we must let him in, or he will throw us down from Heaven." And they
let him in. But Gambling Hansel instantly began to play again, and there
was such a noise and confusion that there was no hearing what they
themselves were saying. Therefore St. Peter once more said, "Lord, this
cannot go on, we must throw him down, or he will make all Heaven
rebellious." So they went to him at once, and threw him down, and his
soul broke into fragments, and went into the gambling vagabonds who are
living this very day.
