# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/old_sultan
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## Old Sultan 

A farmer once had a faithful dog called Sultan, who had grown old, and
lost all his teeth, so that he could no longer hold anything fast. One
day the farmer was standing with his wife before the house-door, and
said, "To-morrow I intend to shoot Old Sultan, he is no longer of any
use."
His wife, who felt pity for the faithful beast, answered, "He has
served us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well give him his
keep."

"Eh! what?" said the man. "You are not very sharp. He has not a tooth
left in his mouth, and not a thief is afraid of him; now he may be off.
If he has served us, he has had good feeding for it."

The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off, had
heard everything, and was sorry that the morrow was to be his last day.
He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out in the evening into the
forest to him, and complained of the fate that awaited him. "Hark ye,
gossip," said the wolf, "be of good cheer, I will help you out of your
trouble. I have thought of something. To-morrow, early in the morning,
your master is going with his wife to make hay, and they will take their
little child with them, for no one will be left behind in the house.
They are wont, during work-time, to lay the child under the hedge in the
shade; you lay yourself there too, just as if you wished to guard it.
Then I will come out of the wood, and carry off the child. You must rush
swiftly after me, as if you would seize it again from me. I will let it
fall, and you will take it back to its parents, who will think that you
have saved it, and will be far too grateful to do you any harm; on the
contrary, you will be in high favor, and they will never let you want
for anything again."

The plan pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as it was
arranged. The father screamed when he saw the Wolf running across the
field with his child, but when Old Sultan brought it back, then he was
full of joy, and stroked him and said, "Not a hair of yours shall be
hurt, you shall eat my bread free as long as you live." And to his wife
he said, "Go home at once and make Old Sultan some bread-sop that he
will not have to bite, and bring the pillow out of my bed, I will give
him that to lie upon."

Henceforth Old Sultan was as well off as he could wish to be.

Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased that everything
had succeeded so well. "But, gossip," said he, "you will just wink an
eye if when I have a chance, I carry off one of your master's fat
sheep." - "Do not reckon upon that," answered the dog; "I will
remain true to my master; I cannot agree to that." The wolf, who
thought that this could not be spoken in earnest, came creeping about in
the night and was going to take away the sheep. But the farmer, to whom
the faithful Sultan had told the wolf's plan, caught him and dressed
his hide soundly with the flail. The wolf had to pack off, but he cried
out to the dog, "Wait a bit, you scoundrel, you shall pay for this."

The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog to come out
into the forest so that they might settle the affair. Old Sultan could
find no one to stand by him but a cat with only three legs, and as they
went out together the poor cat limped along, and at the same time
stretched out her tail into the air with pain.

The wolf and his friend were already on the spot appointed, but when
they saw their enemy coming they thought that he was bringing a sabre
with him, for they mistook the outstretched tail of the cat for one. And
when the poor beast hopped on its three legs, they could only think
every time that it was picking up a stone to throw at them. So they were
both afraid; the wild boar crept into the under-wood and the wolf jumped
up a tree.

The dog and the cat, when they came up, wondered that there was no one
to be seen. The wild boar, however, had not been able to hide himself
altogether; and one of his ears was still to be seen. Whilst the cat was
looking carefully about, the boar moved his ear; the cat, who thought it
was a mouse moving there, jumped upon it and bit it hard. The boar made
a fearful noise and ran away, crying out, "The guilty one is up in the
tree." The dog and cat looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed of
having shown himself so timid, and made friends with the dog.
