# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_fox_and_the_cat
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The fox and the cat 

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself, "He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world," she spoke to him in a friendly way. "Good-day, dear Mr. Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting through this dear
season?" The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat
from head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would
give any answer or not. At last he said, "Oh, thou wretched
beard-cleaner, thou piebald fool, thou hungry mouse-hunter, what canst
thou be thinking of? Dost thou venture to ask how I am getting on? What
hast thou learnt? How many arts dost thou understand?" - "I understand
but one," replied the cat, modestly. "What art is that?" asked the
fox. "When the hounds are following me, I can spring into a tree and
save myself." - "Is that all?" said the fox. "I am master of a
hundred arts, and have into the bargain a sackful of cunning. Thou
makest me sorry for thee; come with me, I will teach thee how people get
away from the hounds." Just then came a hunter with four dogs. The cat
sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down on top of it, where the branches
and foliage quite concealed her. "Open your sack, Mr. Fox, open your
sack," cried the cat to him, but the dogs had already seized him, and
were holding him fast. "Ah, Mr. Fox," cried the cat. "You with your
hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been able to climb like me,
you would not have lost your life."
