# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_twelve_apostles
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The twelve apostles 

Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord Christ, there lived a
mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy that she no longer
knew how she was to keep them alive at all. She prayed to God daily that
he would grant that all her sons might be on the earth with the Redeemer
who was promised. When her necessity became still greater she sent one
of them after the other out into the world to seek bread for her. The
eldest was called Peter, and he went out and had already walked a long
way, a whole day's journey, when he came into a great forest. He sought
for a way out, but could find none, and went farther and farther astray,
and at the same time felt such great hunger that he could scarcely
stand. At length he became so weak that he was forced to lie down, and
he believed death to be at hand. Suddenly there stood beside him a small
boy who shone with brightness, and was as beautiful and kind as an
angel. The child smote his little hands together, until Peter was forced
to look up and saw him. Then the child said, "Why art thou sitting
there in such trouble?" - "Alas!" answered Peter, "I am going about
the world seeking bread, that I may yet see the dear Saviour who is
promised, that is my greatest desire." The child said, "Come with me,
and thy wish shall be fulfilled." He took poor Peter by the hand, and
led him between some cliffs to a great cavern. When they entered it,
everything was shining with gold, silver, and crystal, and in the midst
of it twelve cradles were standing side by side. Then said the little
angel, "Lie down in the first, and sleep a while, I will rock thee."
Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him until he was al
seep. And when he was asleep, the second brother came also, guided
thither by his guardian angel, and he was rocked to sleep like the
first, and thus came the others, one after the other, until all twelve
lay there sleeping in the golden cradles. They slept, however, three
hundred years, until the night when the Saviour of the world was born.
Then they awoke, and were with him on earth, and were called the twelve
apostles.
