# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_gallant_tailor
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The valiant little tailor 

One summer morning a little tailor was sitting on his board near the
window, and working cheerfully with all his might, when an old woman
came down the street crying, "Good jelly to sell! good jelly to sell!"
The cry sounded pleasant in the little tailor's ears, so he put his
head out of the window, and called out, "Here, my good woman, come
here, if you want a customer."

So the poor woman climbed the steps with her heavy basket, and was
obliged to unpack and display all her pots to the tailor. He looked at
every one of them, and lifting all the lids, applied his nose to each,
and said at last, "The jelly seems pretty good; you may weigh me out
four half ounces, or I don't mind having a quarter of a pound." The
woman, who had expected to find a good customer, gave him what he asked
for, but went off angry and grumbling. "This jelly is the very thing
for me," cried the little tailor; "it will give me strength and
cunning; "and he took down the bread from the cupboard, cut a whole
round of the loaf, and spread the jelly on it, laid it near him, and
went on stitching more gallantly than ever.

All the while the scent of the sweet jelly was spreading throughout the
room, where there were quantities of flies, who were attracted by it and
flew to partake. "Now then, who asked you to come?" said the tailor,
and drove the unbidden guests away. But the flies, not understanding his
language, were not to be got rid of like that, and returned in larger
numbers than before. Then the tailor, not being able to stand it any
longer, took from his chimney-corner a ragged cloth, and saying, "Now,
I'll let you have it!" beat it among them unmercifully. When he
ceased, and counted the slain, he found seven lying dead before him.
"This is indeed somewhat," he said, wondering at his own gallantry;
"the whole town shall know this." So he hastened to cut out a belt,
and he stitched it^ and put on it in large capitals "Seven at one
blow!"

"The town, did I say!" said the little tailor; "the whole world shall
know it!" And his heart quivered with joy, like a lamb's tail. The
tailor fastened the belt round him, and began to think of going out into
the world, for his workshop seemed too small for his worship. So he
looked about in all the house for something that it would be useful to
take with him, but he found nothing but an old cheese, which he put in
his pocket. Outside the door he noticed that a bird had got caught in
the bushes, so he took that and put it in his pocket with the cheese.
Then he set out gallantly on his way, and as he was light and active he
felt no fatigue.

The way led over a mountain, and when he reached the topmost peak he saw
a terrible giant sitting there, and looking about him at his ease. The
tailor went bravely up to him, called out to him, and said, "Comrade,
good day! there you sit looking over the wide world! I am on the way
thither to seek my fortune: have you a fancy to go with me?"

The giant looked at the tailor contemptuously, and said, "You little
rascal! you miserable fellow!" - "That may be!" answered the little
tailor, and undoing his coat he showed the giant his belt; "you can
read there whether I am a man or not!" The giant read: "Seven at one
blow!" and thinking it meant men that the tailor had killed, felt at
once more respect for the little fellow. But as he wanted to prove him,
he took up a stone and squeezed it so hard that water came out of it.
"Now you can do that," said the giant, "that is, if you have the
strength for it."

"That's not much," said the little tailor, "I call that play," and
he put his hand in his pocket and took out the cheese and squeezed it,
so that the whey ran out of it. "Well," said he, "what do you think
of that?"

The giant did not know what to say to it, for he could not have believed
it of the little man. Then the giant took up a stone and threw it so
high that it was nearly out of sight. "Now, little fellow, suppose you
do that!"

"Well thrown," said the tailor; "but the stone fell back to earth
again, I will throw you one that will never come back." So he felt in
his pocket, took out the bird, and threw it into the air. And the bird,
when it found itself at liberty, took wing, flew off, and returned no
more. "What do you think of that, comrade?" asked the tailor. "There
is no doubt that you can throw," said the giant; "but we will see if
you can carry." He led the little tailor to a mighty oak-tree which had
been felled, and was lying on the ground, and said, "Now, if you are
strong enough, help me to carry this tree out of the wood."

"Willingly," answered the little man; "you take the trunk on your
shoulders, I will take the branches with all their foliage, that is much
the most difficult." So the giant took the trunk on his shoulders, and
the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who could not see
what he was doing, had the whole tree to carry, and the little man on it
as well. And the little man was very cheerful and merry, and whistled
the tune: "There were three tailors riding by" as if carrying the tree
was mere child's play. The giant, when he had struggled on under his
heavy load a part of the way, was tired out, and cried, "Look here, I
must let go the tree!"

The tailor jumped off quickly, and taking hold of the tree with both
arms, as if he were carrying it, said to the giant, "You see you can't
carry the tree though you are such a big fellow!"

They went on together a little farther, and presently they came to a
cherry-tree, and the giant took hold of the topmost branches, where the
ripest fruit hung, and pulling them downwards, gave them to the tailor
to hold, bidding him eat. But the little tailor was much too weak to
hold the tree, and as the giant let go, the tree sprang back, and the
tailor was caught up into the air. And when he dropped down again
without any damage, the giant said to him, "How is this? haven't you
strength enough to hold such a weak sprig as that?"

"It is not strength that is lacking," answered the little tailor;
"how should it to one who has slain seven at one blow! I just jumped
over the tree because the hunters are shooting down there in the bushes.
You jump it too, if you can." The giant made the attempt, and not being
able to vault the tree, he remained hanging in the branches, so that
once more the little tailor got the better of him.

Then said the giant, "As you are such a gallant fellow, suppose you
come with me to our den, and stay the night." The tailor was quite
willing, and he followed him. When they reached the den there sat some
other giants by the fire, and each had a roasted sheep in his hand, and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought, "There is
more elbow-room here than in my workshop." And the giant showed him a
bed, and told him he had better lie down upon it and go to sleep. The
bed was, however, too big for the tailor, so he did not stay in it, but
crept into a corner to sleep.

As soon as it was midnight the giant got up, took a great staff of iron
and beat the bed through with one stroke, and supposed he had made an
end of that grasshopper of a tailor.

Very early in the morning the giants went into the wood and forgot all
about the little tailor, and when they saw him coming after them alive
and merry, they were terribly frightened, and, thinking he was going to
kill them, they ran away in all haste.

So the little tailor marched on, always following his nose. And after he
had gone a great way he entered the courtyard belonging to a King's
palace, and there he felt so overpowered with fatigue that he lay down
and fell asleep. In the meanwhile came various people, who looked at him
very curiously, and read on his belt, "Seven at one blow!" - "Oh!"
said they, "why should this great lord come here in time of peace? what
a mighty champion he must be." Then they went and told the King about
him, and they thought that if war should break out what a worthy and
useful man he would be, and that he ought not to be allowed to depart at
any price.

The King then summoned his council, and sent one of his courtiers to the
little tailor to beg him, so soon as he should wake up, to consent to
serve in the King's army. So the messenger stood and waited at the
sleeper's side until his limbs began to stretch, and his eyes to open,
and then he carried his answer back. And the answer was, "That was the
reason for which I came," said the little tailor, "I am ready to enter
the King's service." So he was received into it very honourably, and a
separate dwelling set apart for him. But the rest of the soldiers were
very much set against the little tailor, and they wished him a thousand
miles away. "What shall be done about it?" they said among themselves;
"if we pick a quarrel and fight with him then seven of us will fall at
each blow. That will be of no good to us." So they came to a
resolution, and went all together to the King to ask for their
discharge. "We never intended," said they, "to serve with a man who
kills seven at a blow." The King felt sorry to lose all his faithful
servants because of one man, and he wished that he had never seen him,
and would willingly get rid of him if he might. But he did not dare to
dismiss the little tailor for fear he should kill all the King's
people, and place himself upon the throne.

He thought a long while about it, and at last made up his mind what to
do. He sent for the little tailor, and told him that as he was so great
a warrior he had a proposal to make to him. He told him that in a wood
in his dominions dwelt two giants, who did great damage by robbery,
murder, and fire, and that no man durst go near them for fear of his
life. But that if the tailor should overcome and slay both these giants
the King would give him his only daughter in marriage, and half his
kingdom as dowry, and that a hundred horsemen should go with him to give
him assistance. "That would be something for a man like me 1"thought
the little tailor, "a beautiful princess and half a kingdom are not to
be had every day."

And he said to the King, "Oh yes, I can soon overcome the giants, and
yet have no need of the hundred horsemen; he who can kill seven at one
blow has no need to be afraid of two."

So the little tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the border of the wood he said to his escort, "Stay
here while I go to attack the giants." Then he sprang into the wood,
and looked about him right and left. After a while he caught sight of
the two giants; they were lying down under a tree asleep, and snoring so
that all the branches shook. The little tailor, all alive, filled both
his pockets with stones and climbed up into the tree, and made his way
to an overhanging bough, so that he could seat himself just above the
sleepers; and from there he let one stone after another fall on the
chest of one of the giants. For a long time the giant was quite unaware
of this, but at last he waked up and pushed his comrade, and said,
"What are you hitting me for?"

"You are dreaming," said the other, "I am not touching you." And
they composed themselves again to sleep, and the tailor let fall a stone
on the other giant. "What can that be?" cried he, "what are you
casting at me?"

"I am casting nothing at you," answered the first, grumbling. They
disputed about it for a while, but as they were tired, they gave it up
at last, and their eyes closed once more. Then the little tailor began
his game anew, picked out a heavier stone and threw it down with force
upon the first giant's chest. "This is too much!" cried he, and
sprang up like a madman and struck his companion such a blow that the
tree shook above them. The other paid him back with ready coin, and they
fought with such fury that they tore up trees by their roots to use for
weapons against each other, so that at last they both of them lay dead
upon the ground. And now the little tailor got down. "Another piece of
luck!" said he, "that the tree I was sitting in did not get torn up
too, or else I should have had to jump like a squirrel from one tree to
another." Then he drew his sword and gave each of the giants a few
hacks in the breast, and went back to the horsemen and said, "The deed
is done, I have made an end of both of them: but it went hard with me,
in the struggle they rooted up trees to defend themselves, but it was of
no use, they had to do with a man who can kill seven at one blow."

"Then are you not wounded?" asked the horsemen. "Nothing of the
sort!" answered the tailor, "I have not turned a hair." The horsemen
still would not believe it, and rode into the wood to see, and there
they found the giants wallowing in their blood, and all about them lying
the uprooted trees. The little tailor then claimed the promised boon,
but the King repented him of his offer, and he sought again how to rid
himself of the hero. "Before you can possess my daughter and the half
of my kingdom," said he to the tailor, "you must perform another
heroic act. In the wood lives a unicorn who does great damage; you must
secure him."

"A unicorn does not strike more terror into me than two giants. Seven
at one blow! - that is my way," was the tailor's answer. So, taking a
rope and an axe with him, he went out into the wood, and told those who
were ordered to attend him to wait outside.

He had not far to seek, the unicorn soon came out and sprang at him, as
if he would make an end of him without delay. "Softly, softly," said
he, "most haste, worst speed," and remained standing until the animal
came quite near, then he slipped quietly behind a tree. The unicorn ran
with all his might against the tree and stuck his horn so deep into the
trunk that he could not get it out again, and so was taken. "Now I have
you," said the tailor, coming out from behind the tree, and, putting
the rope round the unicorn's neck, he took the axe, set free the horn,
and when all his party were assembled he led forth the animal and
brought it to the King.

The King did not yet wish to give him the promised reward, and set him a
third task to do. Before the wedding could take place the tailor was to
secure a wild boar which had done a great deal of damage in the wood.
The huntsmen were to accompany him. "All right," said the tailor,
"this is child's play." But he did not take the huntsmen into the
wood, and they were all the better pleased, for the wild boar had many a
time before received them in such a way that they had no fancy to
disturb him.

When the boar caught sight of the tailor he ran at him with foaming
mouth and gleaming tusks to bear him to the ground, but the nimble hero
rushed into a chapel which chanced to be near, and jumped quickly out of
a window on the other side. The boar ran after him, and when he got
inside the door shut after him, and there he was imprisoned, for the
creature was too big and unwieldy to jump out of the window too. Then
the little tailor called the huntsmen that they might see the prisoner
with their own eyes; and then he betook himself to the king, who now,
whether he liked it or not, was obliged to fulfil his promise, and give
him his daughter and the half of his kingdom. But if he had known that
the great warrior was only a little tailor he would have taken it still
more to heart. So the wedding was celebrated with great splendour and
little joy, and the tailor was made into a king.

One night the young queen heard her husband talking in his sleep and
saying, "Now boy, make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches,
or I will lay my yard measure about your shoulders!" And so, as she
perceived of what low birth her husband was, she went to her father the
next morning and told him all, and begged him to set her free from a man
who was nothing better than a tailor. The king bade her be comforted,
saying, "To-night leave your bedroom door open, my guard shall stand
outside, and when he is asleep they shall come in and bind him and carry
him off to a ship, and he shall be sent to the other side of the
world." So the wife felt consoled, but the king's water-bearer, who
had been listening all the while, went to the little tailor and
disclosed to him the whole plan. "I shall put a stop to all this,"
said he.

At night he lay down as usual in bed, and when his wife thought that he
was asleep, she got up, opened the door and lay down again. The little
tailor, who only made believe to be asleep, began to murmur plainly,
"Now, boy, make me that waistcoat and patch me those breeches, or I
will lay my yard measure about your shoulders! I have slain seven at one
blow, killed two giants, caught a unicorn, and taken a wild boar, and
shall I be afraid of those who are standing outside my room door?" And
when they heard the tailor say this, a great fear seized them; they fled
away as if they had been wild hares, and none of them would venture to
attack him. And so the little tailor all his lifetime remained a king.
