# author: Gebrüder Grimm
# source: ?Lucy Crane and Walter Crane (1882), Household Stories, from the Collection of the Bros. Grimm (1882)
# url: https://www.grimmstories.com/en//grimm_fairy-tales/the_queen_bee
# note: copyright of translation tbc

## The queen bee 

Two king's sons once started to seek adventures, and fell into a wild,
reckless way of living, and gave up all thoughts of going home again.
Their third and youngest brother, who was called Witling, and had
remained behind, started off to seek them; and when at last he found
them, they jeered at his simplicity in thinking that he could make his
way in the world, while they who were so much cleverer were
unsuccessful.

But they all three went on together until they came to an ant-hill,
which the two eldest brothers wished to stir up, that they might see the
little ants hurry about in their fright and carrying off their eggs, but
Witling said, "Leave the little creatures alone, I will not suffer them
to be disturbed."

And they went on farther until they came to a lake, where a number of
ducks were swimming about. The two eldest brothers wanted to catch a
couple and cook them, but Witling would not allow it, and said, "Leave
the creatures alone, I will not suffer them to be killed."

And then they came to a bee's-nest in a tree, and there was so much
honey in it that it overflowed and ran down the trunk. The two eldest
brothers then wanted to make a fire beneath the tree, that the bees
might be stifled by the smoke, and then they could get at the honey. But
Witling prevented them, saying, "Leave the little creatures alone, I
will not suffer them to be stifled."

At last the three brothers came to a castle where there were in the
stables many horses standing, all of stone, and the brothers went
through all the rooms until they came to a door at the end secured with
three locks, and in the middle of the door a small opening through which
they could look into the room. And they saw a little grey-haired man
sitting at a table. They called out to him once, twice, and he did not
hear, but at the third time he got up, undid the locks, and came out.
Without speaking a word he led them to a table loaded with all sorts of
good things, and when they had eaten and drunk he showed to each his
bed-chamber.

The next morning the little grey man came to the eldest brother, and
beckoning him, brought him to a table of stone, on which were written
three things directing by what means the castle could be delivered from
its enchantment The first thing was, that in the wood under the moss lay
the pearls belonging to the princess - a thousand in number - and they
were to be sought for and collected, and if he who should undertake the
task had not finished it by sunset, if but one pearl were missing, he
must be turned to stone. So the eldest brother went out, and searched
all day, but at the end of it he had only found one hundred; just as was
said on the table of stone came to pass and he was turned into stone.
The second brother undertook the adventure next day, but it fared with
him no better than with the first; he found two hundred pearls, and was
turned into stone. And so at last it was Witling's turn, and he began
to search in the moss; but it was a very tedious business to find the
pearls, and he grew so out of heart that he sat down on a stone and
began to weep. As he was sitting thus, up came the ant-king with five
thousand ants, whose lives had been saved through Witling's pity, and
it was not very long before the little insects had collected all the
pearls and put them in a heap.

Now the second thing ordered by the table of stone was to get the key of
the princess's sleeping-chamber out of the lake. And when Witling came
to the lake, the ducks whose lives he had saved came swimming, and dived
below, and brought up the key from the bottom.

The third thing that had to be done was the most difficult, and that was
to choose out the youngest and loveliest of the three princesses, as
they lay sleeping. All bore a perfect resemblance each to the other, and
only differed in this, that before they went to sleep each one had eaten
a different sweetmeat, the eldest a piece of sugar, the second a little
syrup, and the third a spoonful of honey. Now the Queen-bee of those
bees that Witling had protected from the fire came at this moment, and
trying the lips of all three, settled on those of the one that had eaten
honey, and so it was that the king's son knew which to choose.

Then the spell was broken; every one awoke from stony sleep, and took
their right form again. And Witling married the youngest and loveliest
princess, and became king after her father's death. But his two
brothers had to put up with the two other sisters.
