# author: Charles Perrault
# source: Charles Perrault (1922), The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault, translated by J. E. Mansion, GEORGE G. HARRAP & CO. LTD., LONDON. W.C.2.
# url: https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/29021/pg29021-images.html
# title: Donkey-skin

Once upon a time there was a King, so great, so beloved by his people,
and so respected by all his neighbours and allies that one might almost
say he was the happiest monarch alive. His good fortune was made even
greater by the choice he had made for wife of a Princess as beautiful as
she was virtuous, with whom he lived in perfect happiness. Now, of this
chaste marriage was born a daughter endowed with so many gifts that they
had no regret because other children were not given to them.

Magnificence, good taste, and abundance reigned in the palace; there
were wise and clever ministers, virtuous and devoted courtiers, faithful
and diligent servants. The spacious stables were filled with the most
beautiful horses in the world, and coverts of rich caparison; but what
most astonished strangers who came to admire them was to see, in the
finest stall, a master donkey, with great long ears.

Now, it was not for a whim but for a good reason that the King had given
this donkey a particular and distinguished place. The special qualities
of this rare animal deserved the distinction, since nature had made it
in so extraordinary a way that its litter, instead of being like that of
other donkeys, was covered every morning with an abundance of beautiful
golden crowns, and golden louis of every kind, which were collected
daily.

Since the vicissitudes of life wait on Kings as much as on their
subjects, and good is always mingled with ill, it
so  befell that the Queen was suddenly
attacked by a fatal illness, and, in spite of science, and the skill of
the doctors, no remedy could be found. There was great mourning
throughout the land. The King who, notwithstanding the famous proverb,
that marriage is the tomb of love, was deeply attached to his wife, was
distressed beyond measure and made fervent vows to all the temples in
his kingdom, and offered to give his life for that of his beloved
consort; but he invoked the gods and the Fairies in vain. The Queen,
feeling her last hour approach, said to her husband, who was dissolved
in tears: \"It is well that I should speak to you of a certain matter
before I die: if, perchance, you should desire to marry again\....\" At
these words the King broke into piteous cries, took his wife\'s hands in
his own, and assured her that it was useless to speak to him of a second
marriage.

\"No, my dear spouse,\" he said at last, \"speak to me rather of how I
may follow you.\"

\"The State,\" continued the Queen with a finality which but increased
the laments of the King, \"the State demands successors, and since I
have only given you a daughter, it will urge you to beget sons who
resemble you; but I ask you earnestly not to give way to the persuasions
of your people until you have found a Princess more beautiful and more
perfectly fashioned than I. I beg you to swear this to me, and then I
shall die content.\"

Perchance, the Queen, who did not lack self-esteem, exacted this oath
firmly believing that there was not her 
equal in the world, and so felt assured that the King would never marry
again. Be this as it may, at length she died, and never did husband make
so much lamentation; the King wept and sobbed day and night, and the
punctilious fulfilment of the rites of widower-hood, even the smallest,
was his sole occupation.

But even great griefs do not last for ever. After a time the magnates of
the State assembled and came to the King, urging him to take another
wife. At first this request seemed hard to him and made him shed fresh
tears. He pleaded the vows he had made to the Queen, and defied his
counsellors to find a Princess more beautiful and better fashioned than
was she, thinking this to be impossible. But the Council treated the
promise as a trifle, and said that it mattered little about beauty if
the Queen were but virtuous and fruitful. For the State needed Princes
for its peace and prosperity, and though, in truth, the Princess, his
daughter, had all the qualities requisite for making a great Queen, yet
of necessity she must choose an alien for her husband, and then the
stranger would take her away with him. If, on the other hand, he
remained in her country and shared the throne with her, their children
would not be considered to be of pure native stock, and so, there being
no Prince of his name, neighbouring peoples would stir up wars, and the
kingdom would be ruined.

The King, impressed by these considerations, promised that he would
think over the matter. And so search was 
made among all the marriageable Princesses for one that would suit him.
Every day charming portraits were brought him, but none gave promise of
the beauty of his late Queen; instead of coming to a decision he brooded
over his sorrow until in the end his reason left him. In his delusions
he imagined himself once more a young man; he thought the Princess his
daughter, in her youth and beauty, was his Queen as he had known her in
the days of their courtship, and living thus in the past he urged the
unhappy girl to speedily become his bride.

The young Princess, who was virtuous and chaste, threw herself at the
feet of the King her father and conjured him, with all the eloquence she
could command, not to constrain her to consent to his unnatural desire.

The King, in his madness, could not understand the reason of her
desperate reluctance, and asked an old Druid-priest to set the
conscience of the Princess at rest. Now this Druid, less religious than
ambitious, sacrificed the cause of innocence and virtue to the favour of
so great a monarch, and instead of trying to restore the King to his
right mind, he encouraged him in his delusion.

 

The young Princess, beside herself with misery, at last bethought her of
the Lilac-fairy, her godmother; determined to consult her, she set out
that same night in a pretty little carriage drawn by a great sheep who
knew all the roads. When she arrived the Fairy, who loved the Princess,
told her that she knew all she had come to say, but that she need have
 no fear, for nothing would harm her if
only she faithfully fulfilled the Fairy\'s injunctions. \"For, my dear
child,\" she said to her, \"it would be a great sin to submit to your
father\'s wishes, but you can avoid the necessity without displeasing
him. Tell him that to satisfy a whim you have, he must give you a dress
the colour of the weather. Never, in spite of all his love and his power
will he be able to give you that.\"

The Princess thanked her godmother from her heart, and the next morning
spoke to the King as the Fairy had counselled her, and protested that no
one would win her hand unless he gave her a dress the colour of the
weather. The King, overjoyed and hopeful, called together the most
skilful workmen, and demanded this robe of them; otherwise they should
be hanged. But he was saved from resorting to this extreme measure,
since, on the second day, they brought the much desired robe. The
heavens are not a more beautiful blue, when they are girdled with clouds
of gold, than was that lovely dress when it was unfolded. The Princess
was very sad because of it, and did not know what to do.

Once more she went to her Fairy-godmother who, astonished that her plan
had been foiled, now told her to ask for another gown the colour of the
moon.

The King again sought out the most clever workmen and expressly
commanded them to make a dress the colour of the moon; and woe betide
them if between the giving of the order and the bringing of the dress
more than twenty-four hours should
elapse. 

The Princess, though pleased with the dress when it was delivered, gave
way to distress when she was with her women and her nurse. The
Lilac-fairy, who knew all, hastened to comfort her and said: \"Either I
am greatly deceived or it is certain that if you ask for a dress the
colour of the sun we shall at last baffle the King your father, for it
would never be possible to make such a gown; in any case we should gain
time.\"

So the Princess asked for yet another gown as the Fairy bade her. The
infatuated King could refuse his daughter nothing, and he gave without
regret all the diamonds and rubies in his crown to aid this superb work;
nothing was to be spared that could make the dress as beautiful as the
sun. And, indeed, when the dress appeared, all those who unfolded it
were obliged to close their eyes, so much were they dazzled. And, truth
to tell, green spectacles and smoked glasses date from that time.

What was the Princess to do? Never had so beautiful and so artistic a
robe been seen. She was dumb-founded, and pretending that its brilliance
had hurt her eyes she retired to her chamber, where she found the Fairy
awaiting her.

On seeing the dress like the sun, the Lilac-fairy became red with rage.
\"Oh! this time, my child,\" she said to the Princess, \"we will put the
King to terrible proof. In spite of his madness I think he will be a
little astonished by the request that I counsel you to make of him; it
is that he  should give you the skin of
that ass he loves so dearly, and which supplies him so profusely with
the means of paying all his expenses. Go, and do not fail to tell him
that you want this skin.\" The Princess, overjoyed at finding yet
another avenue of escape; for she thought that her father could never
bring himself to sacrifice the ass, went to find him, and unfolded to
him her latest desire.

Although the King was astonished by this whim, he did not hesitate to
satisfy it; the poor ass was sacrificed and the skin brought, with due
ceremony, to the Princess, who, seeing no other way of avoiding her
ill-fortune, was desperate.

At that moment her godmother arrived. \"What are you doing, my child?\"
she asked, seeing the Princess tearing her hair, her beautiful cheeks
stained with tears. \"This is the most happy moment of your life. Wrap
yourself in this skin, leave the palace, and walk so long as you can
find ground to carry you: when one sacrifices everything to virtue the
gods know how to mete out reward. Go, and I will take care that your
possessions follow you; in whatever place you rest, your chest with your
clothes and your jewels will follow your steps, and here is my wand
which I will give you: tap the ground with it when you have need of the
chest, and it will appear before your eyes: but haste to set forth, and
do not delay.\" The Princess embraced her godmother many times, and
begged her not to forsake her. Then after she had smeared herself with
soot from the chimney, she wrapped herself up in that ugly skin and
went  out from the magnificent palace
without being recognised by a single person.

The absence of the Princess caused a great commotion. The King, who had
caused a sumptuous banquet to be prepared, was inconsolable. He sent out
more than a hundred gendarmes, and more than a thousand musketeers in
quest of her; but the Lilac-fairy made her invisible to the cleverest
seekers, and thus she escaped their vigilance.

Meanwhile the Princess walked far, far and even farther away; after a
time she sought for a resting place, but although out of charity people
gave her food, she was so dishevelled and dirty that no one wanted to
keep her. At length she came to a beautiful town, at the gate of which
was a small farm. Now the farmer\'s wife had need of a wench to wash the
dishes and to attend to the geese and the pigs, and seeing so dirty a
vagrant offered to engage her. The Princess, who was now much fatigued,
accepted joyfully. She was put into a recess in the kitchen where for
the first days she was subjected to the coarse jokes of the
men-servants, so dirty and unpleasant did the donkey-skin make her
appear. At last they tired of their pleasantries; moreover she was so
attentive to her work that the farmer\'s wife took her under her
protection. She minded the sheep, and penned them up when it was
necessary, and she took the geese out to feed with such intelligence
that it seemed as if she had never done anything else. Everything that
her beautiful hands undertook was done
well. 

One day she was sitting near a clear fountain where she often repaired
to bemoan her sad condition, when she thought she would look at herself
in the water. The horrible donkey-skin which covered her from head to
toe revolted her. Ashamed, she washed her face and her hands, which
became whiter than ivory, and once again her lovely complexion took its
natural freshness. The joy of finding herself so beautiful filled her
with the desire to bathe in the pool, and this she did. But she had to
don her unworthy skin again before she returned to the farm.

By good fortune the next day chanced to be a holiday, and so she had
leisure to tap for her chest with the fairy\'s wand, arrange her toilet,
powder her beautiful hair and put on the lovely gown which was the
colour of the weather; but the room was so small that the train could
not be properly spread out. The beautiful Princess looked at herself,
and with good reason, admired her appearance so much that she resolved
to wear her magnificent dresses in turn on holidays and Sundays for her
own amusement, and this she regularly did. She entwined flowers and
diamonds in her lovely hair with admirable art, and often she sighed
that she had no witness of her beauty save the sheep and geese, who
loved her just as much in the horrible donkey-skin after which she had
been named at the farm.

One holiday when Donkey-skin had put on her sun-hued dress, the son of
the King to whom the farm belonged alighted there to rest on his return
from the hunt. This  Prince was young and
handsome, beloved of his father and of the Queen his mother, and adored
by the people. After he had partaken of the simple collation which was
offered him he set out to inspect the farm-yard and all its nooks and
corners. In going thus from place to place, he entered a dark alley at
the bottom of which was a closed door. Curiosity made him put his eye to
the keyhole. Imagine his astonishment at seeing a Princess so beautiful
and so richly dressed, and withal of so noble and dignified a mien, that
he took her to be a divinity. The impetuosity of his feelings at this
moment would have made him force the door, had it not been for the
respect with which that charming figure filled him.

It was with difficulty that he withdrew from this gloomy little alley,
intent on discovering who the inmate of the tiny room might be. He was
told that it was a scullion called Donkey-skin because of the skin which
she always wore, and that she was so dirty and unpleasant that no one
took any notice of her, or even spoke to her; she had just been taken
out of pity to look after the geese.

The Prince, though little satisfied by this information, saw that these
dense people knew no more, and that it was useless to question them. So
he returned to the palace of the King his father, beyond words in love,
having continually before his eyes the beautiful image of the goddess
whom he had seen through the keyhole. He was full of regret that he had
not knocked at the door, and promised
 himself that he would not fail to do so
next time. But the fervency of his love caused him such great agitation
that the same night he was seized by a terrible fever, and was soon at
death\'s door. The Queen, who had no other child, was in despair because
all remedies proved useless. In vain she promised great rewards to the
doctors; though they exerted all their skill, nothing would cure the
Prince. At last they decided that some great sorrow had caused this
terrible fever. They told the Queen, who, full of tenderness for her
son, went to him and begged him to tell her his trouble. She declared
that even if it was a matter of giving him the crown, his father would
yield the throne to him without regret; or if he desired some Princess,
even though there should be war with the King her father and their
subjects should, with reason, complain, all should be sacrificed to
obtain what he wished. She implored him with tears not to die, since
their life depended on his. The Queen did not finish this touching
discourse without moving the Prince to tears.

\"Madam,\" he said at last, in a very feeble voice, \"I am not so base
that I desire the crown of my father, rather may Heaven grant him life
for many years, and that I may always be the most faithful and the most
respectful of his subjects! As to the Princesses that you speak of, I
have never yet thought of marriage, and you well know that, subject as I
am to your wishes, I shall obey you always, even though it be painful to
me.\" 

\"Ah! my son,\" replied the Queen, \"we will spare nothing to save your
life. But, my dear child, save mine and that of the King your father by
telling me what you desire, and be assured that you shall have it.\"

\"Well, Madam,\" he said, \"since you would have me tell you my thought,
I obey you. It would indeed be a sin to place in danger two lives so
dear to me. Know, my mother, that I wish Donkey-skin to make me a cake,
and to have it brought to me when it is ready.\"

The Queen, astonished at this strange name, asked who Donkey-skin might
be.

\"It is, Madam,\" replied one of her officers who had by chance seen
this girl, \"It is the most ugly creature imaginable after the wolf, a
slut who lodges at your farm, and minds your geese.\"

\"It matters not,\" said the Queen; \"my son, on his way home from the
chase, has perchance eaten of her cakes; it is a whim such as those who
are sick do sometimes have. In a word, I wish that Donkey-skin, since
Donkey-skin it is, make him presently a cake.\"

A messenger ran to the farm and told Donkey-skin that she was to make a
cake for the Prince as well as she possibly could. Now, some believe
that Donkey-skin had been aware of the Prince in her heart at the moment
when he had put his eye to the keyhole; and then, looking from her
little window, she had seen him, so young, so handsome, and so shapely,
that the remembrance  of him had
remained, and that often the thought of him had cost her some sighs. Be
that as it may, Donkey-skin, either having seen him, or having heard him
spoken of with praise, was overjoyed to think that she might become
known to him. She shut herself in her little room, threw off the ugly
skin, bathed her face and hands, arranged her hair, put on a beautiful
corsage of bright silver, and an equally beautiful petticoat, and then
set herself to make the much desired cake. She took the finest flour,
and newest eggs and freshest butter, and while she was working them,
whether by design or no, a ring which she had on her finger fell into
the cake and was mixed in it. When the cooking was done she muffled
herself in her horrible skin and gave the cake to the messenger, asking
him for news of the Prince; but the man would not deign to reply, and
without a word ran quickly back to the palace.

The Prince took the cake greedily from the man\'s hands, and ate it with
such voracity that the doctors who were present did not fail to say that
this haste was not a good sign. Indeed, the Prince came near to being
choked by the ring, which he nearly swallowed, in one of the pieces of
cake. But he drew it cleverly from his mouth, and his desire for the
cake was forgotten as he examined the fine emerald set in a gold
keeper-ring, a ring so small that he knew it could only be worn on the
prettiest little finger in the world. 

He kissed the ring a thousand times, put it under his pillow, and drew
it out every moment that he thought himself unobserved. The torment that
he gave himself, planning how he might see her to whom the ring
belonged, not daring to believe that if he asked for Donkey-skin she
would be allowed to come, and not daring to speak of what he had seen
through the keyhole for fear that he would be laughed at for a dreamer,
brought back the fever with great violence. The doctors, not knowing
what more to do, declared to the Queen that the Prince\'s malady was
love, whereupon the Queen and the disconsolate King ran to their son.

\"My son, my dear son,\" cried the affected monarch, \"tell us the name
of her whom you desire: we swear that we will give her to you. Even
though she were the vilest of slaves.\"

The Queen embracing him, agreed with all that the King had said, and the
Prince, moved by their tears and caresses, said to them: \"My father and
my mother, I in no way desire to make a marriage which is displeasing to
you.\" And drawing the emerald from under his pillow he added: \"To
prove the truth of this, I desire to marry her to whom this ring
belongs. It is not likely that she who owns so pretty a ring is a rustic
or a peasant.\"

The King and the Queen took the ring, examined it with great curiosity,
and agreed with the Prince that it could only belong to the daughter of
a good house. Then the King, having embraced his son, and entreated him
to get well, went  out. He ordered the
drums and fifes and trumpets to be sounded throughout the town, and the
heralds to cry that she whose finger a certain ring would fit should
marry the heir to the throne.

First the Princesses arrived, then the duchesses, and the marquises, and
the baronesses; but though they did all they could to make their fingers
small, none could put on the ring. So the country girls had to be tried,
but pretty though they all were, they all had fingers that were too fat.
The Prince, who was feeling better, made the trial himself. At last it
was the turn of the chamber-maids; but they succeeded no better. Then,
when everyone else had tried, the Prince asked for the kitchen-maids,
the scullions, and the sheep-girls. They were all brought to the palace,
but their coarse red, short, fingers would hardly go through the golden
hoop as far as the nail.

\"You have not brought that Donkey-skin, who made me the cake,\" said
the Prince.

Everyone laughed and said, \"No,\" so dirty and unpleasant was she.

\"Let someone fetch her at once,\" said the King; \"it shall not be said
that I left out the lowliest.\" And the servants ran laughing and
mocking to find the goose-girl.

The Princess, who had heard the drums and the cries of the heralds, had
no doubt that the ring was the cause of this uproar. Now, she loved the
Prince, and, as true love is timorous and has no vanity, she was in
perpetual fear that some other lady would be found to have a finger as
small as  hers. Great, then, was her joy
when the messengers came and knocked at her door. Since she knew that
they were seeking the owner of the right finger on which to set her
ring, some impulse had moved her to arrange her hair with great care,
and to put on her beautiful silver corsage, and the petticoat full of
furbelows and silver lace studded with emeralds. At the first knock she
quickly covered her finery with the donkey-skin and opened the door. The
visitors, in derision, told her that the King had sent for her in order
to marry her to his son. Then with loud peals of laughter they led her
to the Prince, who was astonished at the garb of this girl, and dared
not believe that it was she whom he had seen so majestic and so
beautiful. Sad and confounded, he said, \"Is it you who lodge at the
bottom of that dark alley in the third yard of the farm?\"

\"Yes, your Highness,\" she replied.

\"Show me your hand,\" said the Prince trembling, and heaving a deep
sigh.

Imagine how astonished everyone was! The King and the Queen, the
chamberlains and all the courtiers were dumb-founded, when from beneath
that black and dirty skin came a delicate little white and rose-pink
hand, and the ring slipped without difficulty on to the prettiest little
finger in the world. Then, by a little movement which the Princess made,
the skin fell from her shoulders and so enchanting was her guise, that
the Prince, weak though he was, fell on his knees and held her so
closely that she blushed. But that was
scarcely  noticed, for the King and Queen
came to embrace her heartily, and to ask her if she would marry their
son. The Princess, confused by all these caresses and by the love of the
handsome young Prince, was about to thank them when suddenly the ceiling
opened, and the Lilac-fairy descended in a chariot made of the branches
and flowers from which she took her name, and, with great charm, told
the Princess\'s story. The King and Queen, overjoyed to know that
Donkey-skin was a great Princess redoubled their caresses, but the
Prince was even more sensible of her virtue, and his love increased as
the Fairy unfolded her tale. His impatience to marry her, indeed, was so
great that he could scarcely allow time for the necessary preparations
for the grand wedding which was their due. The King and Queen, now
entirely devoted to their daughter-in-law, overwhelmed her with
affection. She had declared that she could not marry the Prince without
the consent of the King her father, so, he was the first to whom an
invitation to the wedding was sent; he was not, however, told the name
of the bride. The Lilac-fairy, who, as was right, presided over all, had
recommended this course to prevent trouble. Kings came from all the
countries round, some in sedan-chairs, others in beautiful carriages;
those who came from the most distant countries rode on elephants and
tigers and eagles. But the most magnificent and most glorious of all was
the father of the Princess. He had happily recovered his reason, and had
married a Queen who was a widow and very beautiful,
but  by whom he had no child. The
Princess ran to him, and he recognised her at once and embraced her with
great tenderness before she had time to throw herself on her knees. The
King and Queen presented their son to him, and the happiness of all was
complete. The nuptials were celebrated with all imaginable pomp, but the
young couple were hardly aware of the ceremony, so wrapped up were they
in one another.

In spite of the protests of the noble-hearted young man, the Prince\'s
father caused his son to be crowned the same day, and kissing his hand,
placed him on the throne.

The celebrations of this illustrious marriage lasted nearly three
months, but the love of the two young people would have endured for more
than a hundred years, had they out-lived that age, so great was their
affection for one another.

**The Moral**

*It scarce may be believed*, /
*This tale of Donkey-skin*; /
*But laughing children in the home*; /
*Yea, mothers, and grandmothers too*, /
*Are little moved by facts*! /
*By* them *\'twill be received.*

