# author: Charles Perrault
# source: Charles Perrault (1901), The Tales of Mother Goose, translated by Charles Welsh, D.C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO, U.S.A.
# url: https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/17208/pg17208-images.html
# title: THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOODS.

Once upon a time there was a king and a queen, who were very sorry that
they had no children,---so sorry that it cannot be told.

At last, however, the Queen had a daughter. There was a very fine
christening; and the Princess had for her godmothers all the fairies
they could find in the whole kingdom (there were seven of them), so that
every one of them might confer a gift upon her, as was the custom of
fairies in those days. By this means the Princess had all the
perfections imaginable.

After the christening was over, the company returned to the King\'s
palace, where was prepared a great feast for the fairies. There was
placed before every one of them a magnificent cover with a case of
massive gold, wherein were a spoon, and a knife and fork, all of pure
gold set with diamonds and rubies. But as they were all sitting down at
table they saw a very old fairy come into the hall. She had not been
invited, because for more than fifty years she had not been out of a
certain tower, and she was believed to be either dead or enchanted.

 

The King ordered her a cover, but he could not give her a case of gold
as the others had, because seven only had been made for the seven
fairies. The old fairy fancied she was slighted, and muttered threats
between her teeth. One of the young fairies who sat near heard her, and,
judging that she might give the little Princess some unlucky gift, hid
herself behind the curtains as soon as they left the table. She hoped
that she might speak last and undo as much as she could the evil which
the old fairy might do.

In the meanwhile all the fairies began to give their gifts to the
Princess. The youngest gave her for her gift that she should be the most
beautiful person in the world; the next, that she should have the wit of
an angel; the third, that she should be able to do everything she did
gracefully; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly; the fifth, that
she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that she should play
all kinds of musical instruments to the fullest perfection.

The old fairy\'s turn coming next, her head shaking more with spite than
with age, she said that the Princess should pierce her hand with a
spindle and die of the wound. This terrible gift made the whole company
tremble, and everybody fell a-crying.

At this very instant the young fairy came from  behind the curtains and said these words in a loud
voice:---

\"Assure yourselves, O King and Queen, that your daughter shall not die
of this disaster. It is true, I have no power to undo entirely what my
elder has done. The Princess shall indeed pierce her hand with a
spindle; but, instead of dying, she shall only fall into a deep sleep,
which shall last a hundred years, at the end of which a king\'s son
shall come and awake her.\"

The King, to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old fairy, issued
orders forbidding any one, on pain of death, to spin with a distaff and
spindle, or to have a spindle in his house. About fifteen or sixteen
years after, the King and Queen being absent at one of their country
villas, the young Princess was one day running up and down the palace;
she went from room to room, and at last she came into a little garret on
the top of the tower, where a good old woman, alone, was spinning with
her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the King\'s orders
against spindles.

\"What are you doing there, my good woman?\" said the Princess.

\"I am spinning, my pretty child,\" said the old woman, who did not know
who the Princess was.

\"Ha!\" said the Princess, \"this is very pretty; how do you do it? Give
it to me. Let me see if I can do it.\"

 

She had no sooner taken it into her hand than, either because she was
too quick and heedless, or because the decree of the fairy had so
ordained, it ran into her hand, and she fell down in a swoon.

The good old woman, not knowing what to do, cried out for help. People
came in from every quarter; they threw water upon the face of the
Princess, unlaced her, struck her on the palms of her hands, and rubbed
her temples with cologne water; but nothing would bring her to herself.

Then the King, who came up at hearing the noise, remembered what the
fairies had foretold. He knew very well that this must come to pass,
since the fairies had foretold it, and he caused the Princess to be
carried into the finest room in his palace, and to be laid upon a bed
all embroidered with gold and silver. One would have taken her for a
little angel, she was so beautiful; for her swooning had not dimmed the
brightness of her complexion: her cheeks were carnation, and her lips
coral. It is true her eyes were shut, but she was heard to breathe
softly, which satisfied those about her that she was not dead.

The King gave orders that they should let her sleep quietly till the
time came for her to awake. The good fairy who had saved her life by
condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin,
twelve thousand leagues off,  when this accident
befell the Princess; but she was instantly informed of it by a little
dwarf, who had seven-leagued boots, that is, boots with which he could
stride over seven leagues of ground at once. The fairy started off at
once, and arrived, about an hour later, in a fiery chariot drawn by
dragons.

The King handed her out of the chariot, and she approved everything he
had done; but as she had very great foresight, she thought that when the
Princess should awake she might not know what to do with herself, if she
was all alone in this old palace. This was what she did: she touched
with her wand everything in the palace (except the King and
Queen),---governesses, maids of honor, ladies of the bedchamber,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, undercooks, kitchen maids, guards
with their porters, pages, and footmen; she likewise touched all the
horses which were in the stables, the cart horses, the hunters and the
saddle horses, the grooms, the great dogs in the outward court, and
little Mopsey, too, the Princess\'s spaniel, which was lying on the bed.

As soon as she touched them they all fell asleep, not to awake again
until their mistress did, that they might be ready to wait upon her when
she wanted them. The very spits at the fire, as full as they could hold
of partridges and pheasants, fell asleep, and the fire itself as well.
 All this was done in a moment. Fairies are not long
in doing their work.

And now the King and Queen, having kissed their dear child without
waking her, went out of the palace and sent forth orders that nobody
should come near it.

These orders were not necessary; for in a quarter of an hour\'s time
there grew up all round about the park such a vast number of trees,
great and small, bushes and brambles, twining one within another, that
neither man nor beast could pass through; so that nothing could be seen
but the very top of the towers of the palace; and that, too, only from
afar off. Every one knew that this also was the work of the fairy in
order that while the Princess slept she should have nothing to fear from
curious people.

After a hundred years the son of the King then reigning, who was of
another family from that of the sleeping Princess, was a-hunting on that
side of the country, and he asked what those towers were which he saw in
the middle of a great thick wood. Every one answered according as they
had heard. Some said that it was an old haunted castle, others that all
the witches of the country held their midnight revels there, but the
common opinion was that it was an ogre\'s dwelling, and that he carried
to it all the little children he could catch, so as to eat them up at
his leisure, without  any one being able to follow
him, for he alone had the power to make his way through the wood.

The Prince did not know what to believe, and presently a very aged
countryman spake to him thus:---

\"May it please your royal Highness, more than fifty years since I heard
from my father that there was then in this castle the most beautiful
princess that was ever seen; that she must sleep there a hundred years,
and that she should be waked by a king\'s son, for whom she was
reserved.\"

The young Prince on hearing this was all on fire. He thought, without
weighing the matter, that he could put an end to this rare adventure;
and, pushed on by love and the desire of glory, resolved at once to look
into it.

As soon as he began to get near to the wood, all the great trees, the
bushes, and brambles gave way of themselves to let him pass through. He
walked up to the castle which he saw at the end of a large avenue; and
you can imagine he was a good deal surprised when he saw none of his
people following him, because the trees closed again as soon as he had
passed through them. However, he did not cease from continuing his way;
a young prince in search of glory is ever valiant.

He came into a spacious outer court, and what he saw was enough to
freeze him with horror. A frightful silence reigned over all; the image
of  death was everywhere, and there was nothing to
be seen but what seemed to be the outstretched bodies of dead men and
animals. He, however, very well knew, by the ruby faces and pimpled
noses of the porters, that they were only asleep; and their goblets,
wherein still remained some drops of wine, showed plainly that they had
fallen asleep while drinking their wine.

He then crossed a court paved with marble, went up the stairs, and came
into the guard chamber, where guards were standing in their ranks, with
their muskets upon their shoulders, and snoring with all their might. He
went through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies, some standing
and others sitting, but all were asleep. He came into a gilded chamber,
where he saw upon a bed, the curtains of which were all open, the most
beautiful sight ever beheld---a princess who appeared to be about
fifteen or sixteen years of age, and whose bright and resplendent beauty
had something divine in it. He approached with trembling and admiration,
and fell down upon his knees before her.

Then, as the end of the enchantment was come, the Princess awoke, and
looking on him with eyes more tender than could have been expected at
first sight, said:---

\"Is it you, my Prince? You have waited a long while.\"

 The Prince, charmed with these words, and much more
with the manner in which they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy
and gratitude; he assured her that he loved her better than he did
himself. Their discourse was not very connected, but they were the
better pleased, for where there is much love there is little eloquence.
He was more at a loss than she, and we need not wonder at it; she had
had time to think of what to say to him; for it is evident (though
history says nothing of it) that the good fairy, during so long a sleep,
had given her very pleasant dreams. In short, they talked together for
four hours, and then they said not half they had to say.

In the meanwhile all the palace had woke up with the Princess; every one
thought upon his own business, and as they were not in love, they were
ready to die of hunger. The lady of honor, being as sharp set as the
other folks, grew very impatient, and told the Princess aloud that the
meal was served. The Prince helped the Princess to rise. She was
entirely and very magnificently dressed; but his royal Highness took
care not to tell her that she was dressed like his great-grandmother,
and had a high collar. She looked not a bit the less charming and
beautiful for all that.

They went into the great mirrored hall, where they supped, and were
served by the officers of the Princess\'s household. The violins and
haut boys played old tunes, but they were excellent,
though they had not been played for a hundred years; and after supper,
without losing any time, the lord almoner married them in the chapel of
the castle. They had but very little sleep---the Princess scarcely
needed any; and the Prince left her next morning to return into the
city, where his father was greatly troubled about him.

The Prince told him that he lost his way in the forest as he was
hunting, and that he had slept in the cottage of a charcoal-burner, who
gave him cheese and brown bread.

The King, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother
could not be persuaded that it was true; and seeing that he went almost
every day a-hunting, and that he always had some excuse ready for so
doing, though he had been out three or four nights together, she began
to suspect that he was married; for he lived thus with the Princess
above two whole years, during which they had two children, the elder, a
daughter, was named Dawn, and the younger, a son, they called Day,
because he was a great deal handsomer than his sister.

The Queen spoke several times to her son, to learn after what manner he
was passing his time, and told him that in this he ought in duty to
satisfy her. But he never dared to trust her with his secret; he feared
her, though he loved her,  for she was of the race
of the Ogres, and the King married her for her vast riches alone. It was
even whispered about the Court that she had Ogreish inclinations, and
that, whenever she saw little children passing by, she had all the
difficulty in the world to prevent herself from falling upon them. And
so the Prince would never tell her one word.

But when the King was dead, which happened about two years afterward,
and he saw himself lord and master, he openly declared his marriage: and
he went in great state to conduct his Queen to the palace. They made a
magnificent entry into the capital city, she riding between her two
children.

Soon after, the King made war on Emperor Cantalabutte, his neighbor. He
left the government of the kingdom to the Queen, his mother, and
earnestly commended his wife and children to her care. He was obliged to
carry on the war all the summer, and as soon as he left, the
Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law and her children to a country
house among the woods, that she might with the more ease gratify her
horrible longing. Some few days afterward she went thither herself, and
said to her head cook:---

\"I intend to eat little Dawn for my dinner to-morrow.\"

\"O! madam!\" cried the head cook.

 

\"I will have it so,\" replied the Queen (and this she spoke in the tone
of an Ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), \"and will eat
her with a sharp sauce.\"

The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with
Ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Dawn\'s chamber.
She was then nearly four years old, and came up to him, jumping and
laughing, to put her arms round his neck, and ask him for some
sugar-candy. Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of
his hand, and he went into the back yard and killed a little lamb, and
dressed it with such good sauce that his mistress assured him she had
never eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken
up little Dawn and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in his
lodging at the end of the courtyard.

Eight days afterwards the wicked Queen said to the chief cook, \"I will
sup upon little Day.\"

He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her again as he had done
before. He went to find little Day, and saw him with a foil in his hand,
with which he was fencing with a great monkey: the child was then only
three years of age. He took him up in his arms and carried him to his
wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along with his sister,
and instead of little Day he served up a young and very  tender kid, which the Ogress found to be wonderfully
good.

All had gone well up to now; but one evening this wicked Queen said to
her chief cook:---

\"I will eat the Queen with the same sauce I had with her children.\"

Now the poor chief cook was in despair and could not imagine how to
deceive her again. The young Queen was over twenty years old, not
reckoning the hundred years she had been asleep: and how to find
something to take her place greatly puzzled him. He then decided, to
save his own life, to cut the Queen\'s throat; and going up into her
chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great fury
as he possibly could, and came into the young Queen\'s room with his
dagger in his hand. He would not, however, deceive her, but told her,
with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the
Queen-mother.

\"Do it; do it,\" she said, stretching out her neck. \"Carry out your
orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom
I loved so much and so tenderly.\"

For she thought them dead, since they had been taken away without her
knowledge.

\"No, no, madam,\" cried the poor chief cook, all in tears; \"you shall
not die, and you shall see your children again at once. But then you
must  go home with me to my lodgings, where I have
concealed them, and I will deceive the Queen once more, by giving her a
young hind in your stead.\"

Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his room, where, leaving her to
embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a
young hind, which the Queen had for her supper, and devoured with as
much appetite as if it had been the young Queen. She was now well
satisfied with her cruel deeds, and she invented a story to tell the
King on his return, of how the Queen his wife and her two children had
been devoured by mad wolves.

One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about
the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh
meat, she heard, in a room on the ground floor, little Day crying, for
his mamma was going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she
heard, at the same time, little Dawn begging mercy for her brother.

The Ogress knew the voice of the Queen and her children at once, and
being furious at having been thus deceived, she gave orders (in a most
horrible voice which made everybody tremble) that, next morning by break
of day, they should bring into the middle of the great court a large tub
filled with toads, vipers, snakes, and all sorts  of
serpents, in order to have the Queen and her children, the chief cook,
his wife and maid, thrown into it, all of whom were to be brought
thither with their hands tied behind them.

They were brought out accordingly, and the executioners were just going
to throw them into the tub, when the King, who was not so soon expected,
entered the court on horseback and asked, with the utmost astonishment,
what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle.

No one dared to tell him, when the Ogress, all enraged to see what had
happened, threw herself head foremost into the tub, and was instantly
devoured by the ugly creatures she had ordered to be thrown into it to
kill the others. The King was of course very sorry, for she was his
mother; but he soon comforted himself with his beautiful wife and his
pretty children.
